=== MANNERISM STYLE ARTICLES ===

Title: Mannerism
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mannerism

Toggle the table of contents
Mannerism
65 languages
Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history
Tools
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
In Parmigianino's Madonna with the Long Neck (1534–1540), Mannerism makes itself known by elongated proportions, highly stylized poses, and lack of clear perspective.
Mannerism is a style in European art that emerged in the later years of the Italian High Renaissance around 1520, spreading by about 1530 and lasting until about the end of the 16th century in Italy, when the Baroque style largely replaced it. Northern Mannerism continued into the early 17th century.[1]
Mannerism encompasses a variety of approaches influenced by, and reacting to, the harmonious ideals associated with artists such as Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Vasari,[2] and early Michelangelo. Where High Renaissance art emphasizes proportion, balance, and ideal beauty, Mannerism exaggerates such qualities, often resulting in compositions that are asymmetrical or unnaturally elegant.[3] Notable for its artificial (as opposed to naturalistic) qualities,[4] this artistic style privileges compositional tension and instability rather than the balance and clarity of earlier Renaissance painting. Mannerism in literature and music is notable for its highly florid style and intellectual sophistication.[5]
The definition of Mannerism and the phases within it continue to be a subject of debate among art historians. For example, some scholars have applied the label to certain early modern forms of literature (especially poetry) and music of the 16th and 17th centuries. The term is also used to refer to some late Gothic[6] painters working in northern Europe from about 1500 to 1530, especially the Antwerp Mannerists[7]—a group unrelated to the Italian movement. Mannerism has also been applied by analogy to the Silver Age of Latin literature.[8]
Nomenclature[edit]
Model for Mannerism: Laocoön and His Sons, an ancient sculpture, rediscovered in 1506; now in the Vatican Museums. The artists of Mannerism greatly admired this piece of sculpture.[3]
The word "Mannerism" derives from the Italian maniera, meaning "style" or "manner". Like the English word "style", maniera can either indicate a specific type of style (a beautiful style, an abrasive style) or indicate an absolute that needs no qualification (someone "has style").[9] In the second edition of his Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects (1568), Giorgio Vasari[10] used maniera in three different contexts: to discuss an artist's manner or method of working; to describe a personal or group style, such as the term maniera greca to refer to the medieval Italo-Byzantine style or simply to the maniera of Michelangelo; and to affirm a positive judgment of artistic quality.[11] Vasari was also a Mannerist artist, and he described the period in which he worked as "la maniera moderna", or the "modern style".[12] James V. Mirollo describes how "Bella maniera" poets attempted to surpass in virtuosity the sonnets of Petrarch.[13] This notion of "Bella maniera" suggests that artists who were thus inspired looked to copying and bettering their predecessors, rather than confronting nature directly. In essence, "Bella maniera" utilized the best from several source materials, synthesizing it into something new.[13]
As a stylistic label, "Mannerism" is not easily defined. It was used by Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt and popularized by German art historians in the early 20th century to categorize the seemingly uncategorizable art of the Italian 16th century—art that was no longer found to exhibit the harmonious and rational approaches associated with the High Renaissance. "High Renaissance" connoted a period distinguished by harmony, grandeur, and the revival of classical antiquity. The term "Mannerist" was redefined in 1967 by John Shearman[14] following the exhibition of Mannerist paintings organised by Fritz Grossmann at Manchester City Art Gallery in 1965.[15]
Yet historians differ as to whether Mannerism is a style, a movement, or a period. Some authors have called it the "Late Renaissance".[16] Although the term remains controversial, it is still commonly used to identify European art and culture in the 16th century.[17]
Origin and development[edit]
By the end of the High Renaissance, young artists experienced a crisis:[3] It seemed that everything that could be achieved was already achieved. No more difficulties, technical or otherwise, remained to be solved. The detailed knowledge of anatomy, light, physiognomy and how humans register emotion in expression and gesture, the innovative use of the human form in figurative composition, and the use of the subtle gradation of tone, all had reached near perfection. The young artists needed to find a new goal, and they sought new approaches.[18] At this point Mannerism started to emerge.[3] The new style developed between 1510 and 1520 either in Florence, or in Rome, or both cities simultaneously.[19]
Collected figures, ignudi, from Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel ceiling
Origins and models[edit]
This period has been described as a "natural extension"[5] of the art of Andrea del Sarto, Michelangelo, and Raphael. Michelangelo developed his style at an early age, a deeply original one that was greatly admired at first, then often copied and imitated by other artists of the era.[5] One of the qualities most admired by his contemporaries was his terribilità, a sense of awe-inspiring grandeur, and subsequent artists attempted to imitate it.[5] Other artists learned Michelangelo's impassioned and highly personal style by copying the works of the master, a standard way that students learned to paint and sculpt. His Sistine Chapel ceiling provided examples for them to follow, in particular his representation of collected figures often called ignudi and of the Libyan Sibyl, his vestibule to the Laurentian Library, the figures on his Medici tombs, and above all his Last Judgment. The later Michelangelo was one of the great models of Mannerism.[5] Young artists broke into his house and stole drawings from him.[20] In his book Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, Giorgio Vasari noted that Michelangelo stated once: "Those who are followers can never pass by whom they follow".[20]
The competitive spirit[edit]
The competitive spirit was cultivated by patrons who encouraged sponsored artists to emphasize virtuosic technique and to compete with one another for commissions. It drove artists to look for new approaches and dramatically illuminated scenes, elaborate clothes and compositions, elongated proportions, highly stylized poses, and a lack of clear perspective. Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo were each given a commission by Gonfaloniere Piero Soderini to decorate a wall in the Hall of Five Hundred in Florence. These two artists were set to paint side by side and compete against each other,[21] fueling the incentive to be as innovative as possible.[citation needed]
Copy after lost original, Michelangelo's Battaglia di Cascina, by Bastiano da Sangallo, originally intended by Michelangelo to compete with Leonardo's entry for the same commission
Copy after lost original, Leonardo da Vinci's Battaglia di Anghiari, by Rubens, originally intended by Leonardo to compete with Michelangelo's entry for the same commission
Early mannerism[edit]
Jacopo Pontormo, Entombment, 1528; Santa Felicita, Florence
The early Mannerists in Florence—especially the students of Andrea del Sarto such as Jacopo da Pontormo and Rosso Fiorentino—are notable for elongated forms, precariously balanced poses, a collapsed perspective, irrational settings, and theatrical lighting. Parmigianino (a student of Correggio) and Giulio Romano (Raphael's head assistant) were moving in similarly stylized aesthetic directions in Rome. These artists had matured under the influence of the High Renaissance, and their style has been characterized as a reaction to or exaggerated extension of it. Instead of studying nature directly, younger artists began studying Hellenistic sculpture and paintings of masters past. Therefore, this style is often identified as "anti-classical",[22] yet at the time it was considered a natural progression from the High Renaissance. The earliest experimental phase of Mannerism, known for its "anti-classical" forms, lasted until about 1540 or 1550.[19] Marcia B. Hall, professor of art history at Temple University, notes in her book After Raphael that Raphael's premature death marked the beginning of Mannerism in Rome.[citation needed]
In past analyses, it has been noted that mannerism arose in the early 16th century contemporaneously with a number of other social, scientific, religious and political movements such as the Copernican heliocentrism, the Sack of Rome in 1527, and the Protestant Reformation's increasing challenge to the power of the Catholic Church. Because of this, the style's elongated forms and distorted forms were once interpreted as a reaction to the idealized compositions prevalent in High Renaissance art.[23] This explanation for the radical stylistic shift c. 1520 has fallen out of scholarly favor, though early Mannerist art is still sharply contrasted with High Renaissance conventions; the accessibility and balance achieved by Raphael's School of Athens no longer seemed to interest young artists.[citation needed]
High maniera[edit]
The second period of Mannerism is commonly differentiated[citation needed] from the earlier, so-called "anti-classical" phase. Subsequent mannerists stressed intellectual conceits and artistic virtuosity, features that have led later critics to accuse them of working in an unnatural and affected "manner" (maniera). Maniera artists looked to their older contemporary Michelangelo as their principal model; theirs was an art imitating art, rather than an art imitating nature. Art historian Sydney Joseph Freedberg argues that the intellectualizing aspect of maniera art involves expecting its audience to notice and appreciate this visual reference—a familiar figure in an unfamiliar setting enclosed between "unseen, but felt, quotation marks".[24] The height of artifice is the Maniera painter's penchant for deliberately misappropriating a quotation. Agnolo Bronzino and Giorgio Vasari exemplify this strain of Maniera that lasted from about 1530 to 1580. Based largely at courts and in intellectual circles around Europe, Maniera art couples exaggerated elegance with exquisite attention to surface and detail: porcelain-skinned figures recline in an even, tempered light, acknowledging the viewer with a cool glance, if they make eye contact at all. The Maniera subject rarely displays much emotion, and for this reason works exemplifying this trend are often called 'cold' or 'aloof.' This is typical of the so-called "stylish style" or Maniera in its maturity.[25]
Spread[edit]
English Mannerism: Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, 1546, a rare English Mannerist portrait by a Flemish immigrant
The cities Rome, Florence, and Mantua were Mannerist centers in Italy. Venetian painting pursued a different course, represented by Titian in his long career. A number of the earliest Mannerist artists who had been working in Rome during the 1520s fled the city after the Sack of Rome in 1527. As they spread out across the continent in search of employment, their style was disseminated throughout Italy and Northern Europe.[26] The result was the first international artistic style since the Gothic.[27] Other parts of Northern Europe did not have the advantage of such direct contact with Italian artists, but the Mannerist style made its presence felt through prints and illustrated books. European rulers, among others, purchased Italian works, while northern European artists continued to travel to Italy, helping to spread the Mannerist style. Individual Italian artists working in the North gave birth to a movement known as the Northern Mannerism. Francis I of France, for example, was presented with Bronzino's Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time. The style waned in Italy after 1580, as a new generation of artists, including the Carracci brothers, Caravaggio and Cigoli, revived naturalism. Walter Friedlaender identified this period as "anti-mannerism", just as the early Mannerists were "anti-classical" in their reaction away from the aesthetic values of the High Renaissance[22]: 14  and today the Carracci brothers and Caravaggio are agreed to have begun the transition to Baroque-style painting which was dominant by 1600.
Outside of Italy, however, Mannerism continued into the 17th century. In France, where Rosso traveled to work for the court at Fontainebleau, it is known as the "Henry II style" and had a particular impact on architecture. Other important continental centers of Northern Mannerism include the court of Rudolf II in Prague, as well as Haarlem and Antwerp. Mannerism as a stylistic category is less frequently applied to English visual and decorative arts, where native labels such as "Elizabethan" and "Jacobean" are more commonly applied. Seventeenth-century Artisan Mannerism is one exception, applied to architecture that relies on pattern books rather than on existing precedents in Continental Europe.[28]
Of particular note is the Flemish influence at Fontainebleau that combined the eroticism of the French style with an early version of the vanitas tradition that would dominate seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish painting. Prevalent at this time was the pittore vago, a description of painters from the north who entered the workshops in France and Italy to create a truly international style.
Sculpture[edit]
As in painting, early Italian Mannerist sculpture was very largely an attempt to find an original style that would top the achievement of the High Renaissance, which in sculpture essentially meant Michelangelo, and much of the struggle to achieve this was played out in commissions to fill other places in the Piazza della Signoria in Florence, next to Michelangelo's David. Baccio Bandinelli took over the project of Hercules and Cacus from the master himself, but it was little more popular then than it is now, and maliciously compared by Benvenuto Cellini to "a sack of melons", though it had a long-lasting effect in apparently introducing relief panels on the pedestal of statues. Like other works of his and other Mannerists, it removes far more of the original block than Michelangelo would have done.[29] Cellini's bronze Perseus with the Head of Medusa is certainly a masterpiece, designed with eight angles of view, another Mannerist characteristic, and artificially stylized in comparison with the Davids of Michelangelo and Donatello.[30] Originally a goldsmith, his famous gold and enamel Salt Cellar (1543) was his first sculpture, and shows his talent at its best.[31]
Small bronze figures for collector's cabinets, often mythological subjects with nudes, were a popular Renaissance form at which Giambologna, originally Flemish but based in Florence, excelled in the later part of the century. He also created life-size sculptures, of which two entered the collection in the Piazza della Signoria. He and his followers devised elegant elongated examples of the figura serpentinata, often of two intertwined figures, that were interesting from all angles.[32]
Apollo's sculpture, Palazzo Giusti, Verona, Mannerism art with typical contrapposto
Stucco overdoor at Fontainebleau, probably designed by Primaticcio, who painted the oval inset, 1530s or 1540s
Benvenuto Cellini, Perseus with the Head of Medusa, 1545–1554
Giambologna, Samson Slaying a Philistine, about 1562
Giambologna, Abduction of a Sabine Woman, completed in 1583, Florence, 13' 6" high, marble
Adriaen de Vries, Mercury and Psyche, Northern Mannerist life-size bronze, made in 1593 for Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor
Venus, c. 125, marble, Roman, British Museum
Early theorists[edit]
Pietro Francavilla, Apollo Victorious over the Python, 1591. The Walters Art Museum.
Giorgio Vasari[edit]
Giorgio Vasari's opinions about the art of painting emerge in the praise he bestows on fellow artists in his multi-volume Lives of the Artists: he believed that excellence in painting demanded refinement, richness of invention (invenzione), expressed through virtuoso technique (maniera), and wit and study that appeared in the finished work, all criteria that emphasized the artist's intellect and the patron's sensibility. The artist was now no longer just a trained member of a local Guild of St Luke. Now he took his place at court alongside scholars, poets, and humanists, in a climate that fostered an appreciation for elegance and complexity. The coat-of-arms of Vasari's Medici patrons appears at the top of his portrait, quite as if it were the artist's own. The framing of the woodcut image of Vasari's Lives would be called "Jacobean" in an English-speaking milieu. In it, Michelangelo's Medici tombs inspire the anti-architectural "architectural" features at the top, the papery pierced frame, the satyr nudes at the base. As a mere frame it is extravagant: Mannerist, in short..
Gian Paolo Lomazzo[edit]
Another literary figure from the period is Gian Paolo Lomazzo, who produced two works—one practical and one metaphysical—that helped define the Mannerist artist's self-conscious relation to his art. His Trattato dell'arte della pittura, scoltura et architettura (Milan, 1584) is in part a guide to contemporary concepts of decorum, which the Renaissance inherited in part from Antiquity but Mannerism elaborated upon. Lomazzo's systematic codification of aesthetics, which typifies the more formalized and academic approaches typical of the later 16th century, emphasized a consonance between the functions of interiors and the kinds of painted and sculpted decors that would be suitable. Iconography, often convoluted and abstruse, is a more prominent element in the Mannerist styles. His less practical and more metaphysical Idea del tempio della pittura (The ideal temple of painting, Milan, 1590) offers a description along the lines of the "four temperaments" theory of human nature and personality, defining the role of individuality in judgment and artistic invention.
Characteristics of artworks[edit]
Mannerism was an anti-classical movement which differed greatly from the aesthetic ideologies of the Renaissance.[33] Though Mannerism was initially accepted with positivity based on the writings of Vasari,[33] it was later regarded in a negative light because it solely view as "an alteration of natural truth and a trite repetition of natural formulas."[33] As an artistic moment, Mannerism involves many characteristics that are unique and specific to experimentation of how art is perceived. Below is a list of many specific characteristics that Mannerist artists would employ in their artworks.
Elongation of figures: often Mannerist work featured the elongation of the human figure – occasionally this contributed to the bizarre imagery of some Mannerist art.[34]
Distortion of perspective: in paintings, the distortion of perspective explored the ideals for creating a perfect space. However, the idea of perfection sometimes alluded to the creation of unique imagery. One way in which distortion was explored was through the technique of foreshortening. At times, when extreme distortion was utilized, it would render the image nearly impossible to decipher.[34]
Black backgrounds: Mannerist artists often utilized flat black backgrounds to present a full contrast of contours in order to create dramatic scenes. Black backgrounds also contributed to a creating sense of fantasy within the subject matter.[34]
Use of darkness and light: many Mannerists were interested in capturing the essence of the night sky through the use of intentional illumination, often creating a sense of fantasy scenes. Notably, special attention was paid to torch and moonlight to create dramatic scenes.[34]
Sculptural forms: Mannerism was greatly influenced by sculpture, which gained popularity in the sixteenth century. As a result, Mannerist artists often based their depictions of human bodies in reference to sculptures and prints. This allowed Mannerist artists to focus on creating dimension.[34]
Clarity of line: the attention that was paid to clean outlines of figures was prominent within Mannerism and differed largely from the Baroque and High Renaissance.The outlines of figures often allowed for more attention to detail.[34]
Composition and space: Mannerist artists rejected the ideals of the Renaissance, notably the technique of one-point perspective. Instead, there was an emphasis on atmospheric effects and distortion of perspective. The use of space in Mannerist works instead privileged crowded compositions with various forms and figures or scant compositions with emphasis on black backgrounds.[34]
Mannerist movement: the interest in the study of human movement often lead to Mannerist artists rendering a unique type of movement linked to serpentine positions. These positions often anticipate the movements of future positions because of their often-unstable motions figures. In addition, this technique attributes to the artist's experimentation of form.[34]
Painted frames: in some Mannerist works, painted frames were utilized to blend in with the background of paintings and at times, contribute to the overall composition of the artwork. This is at times prevalent when there is special attention paid to ornate detailing.[34]
Atmospheric effects: many Mannerists utilized the technique of sfumato, known as, "the rendering of soft and hazy contours or surfaces"[34] in their paintings for rendering the streaming of light.[34]
Mannerist colour: a unique aspect of Mannerism was in addition to the experimentation of form, composition, and light, much of the same curiosity was applied to color. Many artworks toyed with pure and intense hues of blues, green, pinks, and yellows, which at times detract from the overall design of artworks, and at other times, complement it. When painting the figure, artists would often emphasize the lightness of complexions and utilize undertones of blue.[34]
Artists and examples of their work[edit]
Joachim Wtewael Perseus and Andromeda, 1616, Louvre, the composition displaying a Vanité of bones and seashells in the foreground and an elaborate academic nude with a palette borrowing from the forefront for Andromeda's cheeks. The dragon seems of Chinese influence.
Jacopo da Pontormo[edit]
Jacopo da Pontormo's work is one of the most important contributions to Mannerism.[35] He often drew his subject matter from religious narratives; heavily influenced by the works of Michelangelo,[35] he frequently alludes to or uses sculptural forms as models for his compositions.[33] A well-known element of his work is the rendering of gazes by various figures which often pierce out at the viewer in various directions.[33] Dedicated to his work, Pontormo often expressed anxiety about its quality and was known to work slowly and methodically.[33] His legacy is highly regarded, as he influenced artists such as Agnolo Bronzino and the aesthetic ideals of late Mannerism.[35]
Pontormo's Joseph in Egypt, painted in 1517,[33] portrays a running narrative of four Biblical scenes in which Joseph reconnects with his family. On the left side of the composition, Pontomoro depicts a scene of Joseph introducing his family to the Pharaoh of Egypt. On the right, Joseph is riding on a rolling bench, as cherubs fill the composition around him in addition to other figures and large rocks on a path in the distance. Above these scenes, is a spiral staircase which Joseph guides one his sons to their mother at the top. The final scene, on the right, is the final stage of Jacob's death as his sons watch nearby.[33]
Pontormo's Joseph in Egypt features many Mannerist elements. One element is utilization of incongruous colors such as various shades of pinks and blues which make up a majority of the canvas. An additional element of Mannerism is the incoherent handling of time about the story of Joseph through various scenes and use of space. Through the inclusion of the four different narratives, Ponotormo creates a cluttered composition and overall sense of busyness.
Rosso Fiorentino and the School of Fontainebleau[edit]
Rosso Fiorentino, who had been a fellow pupil of Pontormo in the studio of Andrea del Sarto, in 1530 brought Florentine Mannerism to Fontainebleau, where he became one of the founders of French 16th-century Mannerism, popularly known as the School of Fontainebleau.
The examples of a rich and hectic decorative style at Fontainebleau further disseminated the Italian style through the medium of engravings to Antwerp, and from there throughout Northern Europe, from London to Poland. Mannerist design was extended to luxury goods like silver and carved furniture. A sense of tense, controlled emotion expressed in elaborate symbolism and allegory, and an ideal of female beauty characterized by elongated proportions are features of this style.
Agnolo Bronzino[edit]
High Mannerism: Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time by Bronzino, c. 1545; National Gallery, London
Agnolo Bronzino was a pupil of Pontormo,[36] whose style was very influential and often confusing in terms of figuring out the attribution of many artworks.[36] During his career, Bronzino also collaborated with Vasari as a set designer for the production "Comedy of Magicians", where he painted many portraits.[36] Bronzino's work was sought after, and he enjoyed great success when he became a court painter for the Medici family in 1539.[36] A unique Mannerist characteristic of Bronzino's work was the rendering of milky complexions.[36]
In the painting, Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time, Bronzino portrays an erotic scene that leaves the viewer with more questions than answers. In the foreground, Cupid and Venus are nearly engaged in a kiss, but pause as if caught in the act. Above the pair are mythological figures, Father Time on the right, who pulls a curtain to reveal the pair and the representation of the goddess of the night on the left. The composition also involves a grouping of masks, a hybrid creature composed of features of a girl and a serpent, and a man depicted in agonizing pain. Many theories are available for the painting, such as it conveying the dangers of syphilis, or that the painting functioned as a court game.[37]
Mannerist portraits by Bronzino are distinguished by a serene elegance and meticulous attention to detail. As a result, Bronzino's sitters have been said to project an aloofness and marked emotional distance from the viewer. There is also a virtuosic concentration on capturing the precise pattern and sheen of rich textiles. Specifically, within the Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time, Bronzino utilizes the tactics of Mannerist movement, attention to detail, color, and sculptural forms. Evidence of Mannerist movement is apparent in the awkward movements of Cupid and Venus, as they contort their bodies to partly embrace. Particularly, Bronzino paints the complexion with the many forms as a perfect porcelain white with a smooth effacement of their muscles which provides a reference to the smoothness of sculpture.
Alessandro Allori[edit]
Alessandro Allori's (1535–1607) Susanna and the Elders (below) is distinguished by latent eroticism and consciously brilliant still life detail, in a crowded, contorted composition.
Jacopo Tintoretto[edit]
Jacopo Tintoretto, Last Supper, 1592–1594
Jacopo Tintoretto has been known for his vastly different contributions to Venetian painting after the legacy of Titian. His work, which differed greatly from his predecessors, had been criticized by Vasari for its, "fantastical, extravagant, bizarre style."[38] Within his work, Tintoretto adopted Mannerist elements that have distanced him from the classical notion of Venetian painting, as he often created artworks which contained elements of fantasy and retained naturalism.[38] Other unique elements of Tintoretto's work include his attention to color through the regular utilization of rough brushstrokes[38] and experimentation with pigment to create illusion.[38]
An artwork that is associated with Mannerist characteristics is the Last Supper; it was commissioned by Michele Alabardi for the San Giorgio Maggiore in 1591.[38] In Tintoretto's Last Supper, the scene is portrayed from the angle of group of people along the right side of the composition. On the left side of the painting, Christ and the Apostles occupy one side of the table and single out Judas. Within the dark space, there are few sources of light; one source is emitted by Christ's halo and hanging torch above the table.
In its distinct composition, the Last Supper portrays Mannerist characteristics. One characteristic that Tintoretto utilizes is a black background. Though the painting gives some indication of an interior space through the use of perspective, the edges of the composition are mostly shrouded in shadow which provides drama for the central scene of the Last Supper. Additionally, Tintoretto utilizes the spotlight effects with light, especially with the halo of Christ and the hanging torch above the table. A third Mannerist characteristic that Tintoretto employs are the atmospheric effects of figures shaped in smoke and float about the composition.
El Greco[edit]
El Greco attempted to express religious emotion with exaggerated traits. After the realistic depiction of the human form and the mastery of perspective achieved in High Renaissance, some artists started to deliberately distort proportions in disjointed, irrational space for emotional and artistic effect. El Greco still is a deeply original artist. He has been characterized by modern scholars as an artist so individual that he belongs to no conventional school.[5] Key aspects of Mannerism in El Greco include the jarring "acid" palette, elongated and tortured anatomy, irrational perspective and light, and obscure and troubling iconography.[39][40] El Greco's style was a culmination of unique developments based on his Greek heritage and travels to Spain and Italy.[41]
El Greco's work reflects a multitude of styles including Byzantine elements as well as the influence of Caravaggio and Parmigianino in addition to Venetian coloring.[41] An important element is his attention to color as he regarded it to be one of the most important aspects of his painting.[42] Over the course of his career, El Greco's work remained in high demand as he completed important commissions in locations such as the Colegio de la Encarnación de Madrid.[41]
El Greco, Laocoön (c. 1610–1614), National Gallery of Art
El Greco's unique painting style and connection to Mannerist characteristics is especially prevalent in the work Laocoön. Painted in 1610,[43] it depicts the mythological tale of Laocoön, who warned the Trojans about the danger of the wooden horse which was presented by the Greeks as peace offering to the goddess Minerva. As a result, Minerva retaliated in revenge by summoning serpents to kill Laocoön and his two sons. Instead of being set against the backdrop of Troy, El Greco situated the scene near Toledo, Spain in order to "universalize the story by drawing out its relevance for the contemporary world."[43]
El Greco's unique style in Laocoön exemplifies many Mannerist characteristics. Prevalent is the elongation of many of the human forms throughout the composition in conjunction with their serpentine movement, which provides a sense of elegance. An additional element of Mannerist style is the atmospheric effects in which El Greco creates a hazy sky and blurring of landscape in the background.
Benvenuto Cellini[edit]
Benvenuto Cellini created the Cellini Salt Cellar of gold and enamel in 1540 featuring Poseidon and Amphitrite (water and earth) placed in uncomfortable positions and with elongated proportions. It is considered a masterpiece of Mannerist sculpture.
Minerva Dressing (1613) by Lavinia Fontana (1552–1614). Galleria Borghese, Rome.
Lavinia Fontana[edit]
Lavinia Fontana (1552–1614) was a Mannerist portraitist often acknowledged to be the first female career artist in Western Europe.[44] She was appointed to be the Portraitist in Ordinary at the Vatican.[45] Her style is characterized as being influenced by the Carracci family of painters by the colors of the Venetian School. She is known for her portraits of noblewomen, and for her depiction of nude figures, which was unusual for a woman of her time.[46]
Taddeo Zuccaro (or Zuccari)[edit]
Taddeo Zuccaro was born in Sant'Angelo in Vado, near Urbino, the son of Ottaviano Zuccari, an almost unknown painter. His brother Federico, born around 1540, was also a painter and architect.
Federico Zuccaro (or Zuccari)[edit]
Federico Zuccaro's documented career as a painter began in 1550, when he moved to Rome to work under Taddeo, his elder brother. He went on to complete decorations for Pius IV, and help complete the fresco decorations at the Villa Farnese at Caprarola. Between 1563 and 1565, he was active in Venice with the Grimani family of Santa Maria Formosa. During his Venetian period, he traveled alongside Palladio in Friuli.
Joachim Wtewael[edit]
Joachim Wtewael (1566–1638) continued to paint in a Northern Mannerist style until the end of his life, ignoring the arrival of the Baroque art, and making him perhaps the last significant Mannerist artist still to be working. His subjects included large scenes with still life in the manner of Pieter Aertsen, and mythological scenes, many small cabinet paintings beautifully executed on copper, and most featuring nudity.
Giuseppe Arcimboldo[edit]
Giuseppe Arcimboldo is most readily known for his artworks that incorporate still life and portraiture.[47] His style is viewed as Mannerist with the assemblage style of fruits and vegetables in which its composition can be depicted in various ways—right side up and upside down.[47] Arcimboldo's artworks have also applied to Mannerism in terms of humor that it conveys to viewers, because it does not hold the same degree of seriousness as Renaissance works.[47] Stylistically, Arcimboldo's paintings are known for their attention to nature and concept of a "monstrous appearance".[47]
One of Arcimboldo's paintings which contains various Mannerist characteristics is, Vertumnus. Painted against a black background is a portrait of Rudolf II, whose body is composed of various vegetables, flowers, and fruits.[47] The joke of the painting communicates the humor of power which is that Emperor Rudolf II is hiding a dark inner self behind his public image.[47] On the other hand, the serious tone of the painting foreshadows the good fortune that would be prevalent during his reign.[47]
Vertumnus contains various Mannerist elements in terms of its composition and message. One element is the flat, black background which Arcimboldo utilizes to emphasize the status and identity of the Emperor, as well as highlighting the fantasy of his reign. In the portrait of Rudolf II, Arcimboldo also strays away from the naturalistic representation of the Renaissance, and explores the construction of composition by rendering him from a jumble of fruits, vegetables, plants and flowers. Another element of Mannerism which the painting portrays is the dual narrative of a joke and serious message; humor wasn't normally utilized in Renaissance artworks.
Jacopo Pontormo, Joseph in Egypt, 1515–1518, oil on wood, 96 x 109 cm, National Gallery, London
Rosso Fiorentino, Francois I Gallery, Château de Fontainebleau, France
Juno in a niche, engraving by Jacopo Caraglio, probably from a drawing of 1526 by Rosso Fiorentino
Giuseppe Arcimboldo, The Librarian, 1562, Skokloster Castle
Giuseppe Arcimboldo, Autumn, 1573, oil on canvas, Louvre Museum, Paris
Giuseppe Arcimboldo, Vertumnus the god of seasons, 1591, Skokloster Castle
Bronzino, Portrait of Bia de' Medici, c. 1545
Alessandro Allori, Susanna and the Elders, 1561
El Greco, Baptism, c. 1614
Architecture[edit]
The Vleeshal in Haarlem, Netherlands
The Town Hall in Zamość, Poland, designed by Bernardo Morando
Mannerist architecture was characterized by visual trickery and unexpected elements that challenged the Renaissance norms.[48] Flemish artists, many of whom had traveled to Italy and were influenced by Mannerist developments there, were responsible for the spread of Mannerist trends into Europe north of the Alps, including into the realm of architecture.[49] During the period, architects experimented with using architectural forms to emphasize solid and spatial relationships. The Renaissance ideal of harmony gave way to freer and more imaginative rhythms. The best known architect associated with the Mannerist style, and a pioneer at the Laurentian Library, was Michelangelo (1475–1564).[50] He is credited with inventing the giant order, a large pilaster or column that stretches from the bottom to the top of a multi-storey façade.[51] He used this in his design for the Piazza del Campidoglio in Rome. The Herrerian style (Spanish: estilo herreriano or arquitectura herreriana) of architecture was developed in Spain during the last third of the 16th century under the reign of Philip II (1556–1598),[52] and continued in force in the 17th century, but transformed by the Baroque style of the time. It corresponds to the third and final stage of the Spanish Renaissance architecture, which evolved into a progressive purification ornamental, from the initial Plateresque to classical Purism of the second third of the 16th century and total nudity decorative that introduced the Herrerian style.
Prior to the 20th century, the term Mannerism had negative connotations, but it is now used to describe the historical period in more general, non-judgmental terms.[53] Mannerist architecture has also been used to describe a trend in the 1960s and 1970s that involved breaking the norms of modernist architecture while at the same time recognizing their existence.[54] Defining Mannerism in this context, architect and author Robert Venturi wrote "Mannerism for architecture of our time that acknowledges conventional order rather than original expression but breaks the conventional order to accommodate complexity and contradiction and thereby engages ambiguity unambiguously."[54]
Renaissance examples[edit]
An example of Mannerist architecture is the Villa Farnese at Caprarola,[55] in the rugged countryside outside of Rome. The proliferation of engravers during the 16th century spread Mannerist styles more quickly than any previous styles.
Dense with ornament of "Roman" detailing, the display doorway at Colditz Castle exemplifies the northern style, characteristically applied as an isolated "set piece" against unpretentious vernacular walling.[citation needed]
From the late 1560s onwards, many buildings in Valletta, the new capital city of Malta, were designed by the architect Girolamo Cassar in the Mannerist style. Such buildings include St. John's Co-Cathedral, the Grandmaster's Palace and the seven original auberges. Many of Cassar's buildings were modified over the years, especially in the Baroque period. However, a few buildings, such as Auberge d'Aragon and the exterior of St. John's Co-Cathedral, retain most of Cassar's original Mannerist design.[56]
One of the best examples of Mannerist architecture: Palazzo Te in Mantua, designed by Giulio Romano
Giulio Romano, Ducal Palace, Mantua
Own house of Giulio Romano, in Mantua
Baldassare Peruzzi, Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne, in Rome
Michelangelo, vestibule of Laurentian Library
St. John's Co-Cathedral, in Valletta, Malta
Cathedral Basilica of Salvador, Brazil, built between 1657 and 1746, a UNESCO World Heritage Site[57]
The large Basilica of San Francisco, in Quito, Ecuador, built between 1535 and 1650
The rhyolitic tuff portal of the "church house" at Colditz Castle, Saxony, designed by Andreas Walther II (1584), is an example of the exuberance of Antwerp Mannerism
While many architectural styles explore harmonious ideals, Mannerism wants to take style a step further and explores the aesthetics of hyperbole and exaggeration.[3] Mannerism is notable for its intellectual sophistication as well as its artificial (as opposed to naturalistic) qualities.[58] Mannerism favours compositional tension and instability rather than balance and clarity.[5] The definition of Mannerism, and the phases within it, continues to be the subject of debate among art historians.
Northern or Antwerp Mannerism predates and is distinct from Italian Mannerism. Antwerp during its 16th-century boom produced a style that was the last phase of Early Netherlandish painting with Early Renaissance elements. Through Antwerp, Renaissance and Mannerist styles were widely introduced in England, Germany, and northern and eastern Europe in general.[59]
Literature and music[edit]
Literary mannerism involved such figures as Michelangelo, Clément Marot, Giovanni della Casa, Giovanni Battista Guarini, Torquato Tasso, Veronica Franco, Miguel de Cervantes, and others.[60]
In English literature, Mannerism is commonly identified with the qualities of the "Metaphysical poets" of whom the most famous is John Donne.[61] The witty sally of a Baroque writer, John Dryden, against the verse of Donne in the previous generation, affords a concise contrast between Baroque and Mannerist aims in the arts:
He affects the metaphysics, not only in his satires but in his amorous verses, where nature only should reign; and perplexes the minds of the fair sex with nice[a] speculations of philosophy when he should engage their hearts and entertain them with the softnesses of love.[62]: 15  (italics added)
The rich musical possibilities in the poetry of the late 16th and early 17th centuries provided an attractive basis for the madrigal, which quickly rose to prominence as the pre-eminent musical form in Italian musical culture, as discussed by Tim Carter:
The madrigal, particularly in its aristocratic guise, was obviously a vehicle for the 'stylish style' of Mannerism, with poets and musicians revelling in witty conceits and other visual, verbal and musical tricks to delight the connoisseur.[63]
The word Mannerism has also been used to describe the style of highly florid and contrapuntally complex polyphonic music made in France in the late 14th century.[64] This period is now usually referred to as the ars subtilior.
Mannerism and theatre[edit]
The Early Commedia dell'Arte (1550–1621): The Mannerist Context by Paul Castagno discusses Mannerism's effect on the contemporary professional theatre.[65] Castagno's was the first study to define a theatrical form as Mannerist, employing the vocabulary of Mannerism and maniera to discuss the typification, exaggerated, and effetto meraviglioso of the comici dell'arte. See Part II of the above book for a full discussion of Mannerist characteristics in the commedia dell'arte. The study is largely iconographic, presenting a pictorial evidence that many of the artists who painted or printed commedia images were in fact, coming from the workshops of the day, heavily ensconced in the maniera tradition.
The preciosity in Jacques Callot's minute engravings seem to belie a much larger scale of action. Callot's Balli di Sfessania (lit. 'dance of the buttocks') celebrates the commedia's blatant eroticism, with protruding phalli, spears posed with the anticipation of a comic ream, and grossly exaggerated masks that mix the bestial with human. The eroticism of the innamorate ("lovers") including the baring of breasts, or excessive veiling, was quite in vogue in the paintings and engravings from the second School of Fontainebleau, particularly those that detect a Franco-Flemish influence. Castagno demonstrates iconographic linkages between genre painting and the figures of the commedia dell'arte that demonstrate how this theatrical form was embedded within the cultural traditions of the late cinquecento.[65]
Commedia dell'arte, disegno interno, and the discordia concors[edit]
Important corollaries exist between the disegno interno, which substituted for the disegno esterno (external design) in Mannerist painting. This notion of projecting a deeply subjective view as superseding nature or established principles (perspective, for example), in essence, the emphasis away from the object to its subject, now emphasizing execution, displays of virtuosity, or unique techniques. This inner vision is at the heart of commedia performance. For example, in the moment of improvisation the actor expresses his virtuosity without heed to formal boundaries, decorum, unity, or text. Arlecchino became emblematic of the mannerist discordia concors (the union of opposites), at one moment he would be gentle and kind, then, on a dime, become a thief violently acting out with his battle. Arlecchino could be graceful in movement, only in the next beat, to clumsily trip over his feet. Freed from the external rules, the actor celebrated the evanescence of the moment; much the way Benvenuto Cellini would dazzle his patrons by draping his sculptures, unveiling them with lighting effects and a sense of the marvelous. The presentation of the object became as important as the object itself.
Neo-Mannerism[edit]
In the 20th century, the rise of Neo-Mannerism stemmed from artist Ernie Barnes. The style was heavily influenced by both the Jewish Community, as well as the African-American Community, leading to "The Beauty of the Ghetto" exhibition between 1972 and 1979. The Exhibition toured major American cities, and was hosted by dignitaries, professional athletes, and celebrities. When the exhibition was on view in 1974 at the Museum of African Art in Washington, D.C., Rep. John Conyers stressed the important positive message of the exhibit in the Congressional Record.
The style of Neo-Mannerism, as developed by Barnes, includes subjects with elongated limbs and bodies, as well as exaggerated movement. Another common theme was closed eyes of the subjects, as a visual representation of "how blind we are to one another's humanity".[66] "We look upon each other and decide immediately: This person is black, so he must be ... This person lives in poverty, so he must be ...".
Theatre and cinema[edit]
In an interview, film director Peter Greenaway mentions Federico Fellini and Bill Viola as two major inspirations for his exhaustive and self-referential play with the insoluble tension between the database form of images and the various analogous and digital interfaces that structure them cinematically. This play can be called neo-mannerist precisely insofar as it is distinguished from the (neo-)baroque: "Just as Roman Catholicism would offer you paradise and heaven, there is an equivalent commercial paradise being offered very largely by the whole capitalistic effect, which is associated with Western cinema. This is my political analogy in terms of the use of multimedia as a political weapon. I would equate, in a sense, the great baroque Counter-Reformation, its cultural activity, with what cinema, American cinema predominantly, has been doing in the last seventy years."[67]
As a term of criticism[edit]
According to art critic Jerry Saltz, "Neo-Mannerism" (new Mannerism) is among several clichés that are "squeezing the life out of the art world."[68] Neo-Mannerism describes art of the 21st century that is turned out by students whose academic teachers "have scared [them] into being pleasingly meek, imitative, and ordinary".[68]
See also[edit]
Visual arts portal
Counter-Maniera
Mannerist architecture and sculpture in Poland
Timeline of Italian artists to 1800
Mannerism in Brazil
Philippe Millereau
Art of the late 16th century in Milan
Footnotes[edit]
^ Freedberg 1971, p. 483.
^ "Mannerism". www.nga.gov. Retrieved 3 December 2021.
^
a b c d e Gombrich, E H. The Story of Art London: Phaidon Press Ltd, ISBN 0-7148-3247-2 [page needed]
^ "Mannerism: Bronzino (1503–1572) and his Contemporaries". Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
^
a b c d e f g Art and Illusion, E. H. Gombrich, ISBN 9780691070001
^ "Definition of GOTHIC". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 6 May 2022.
^ "Antwerp Mannerists | art | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 6 May 2022.
^ "the-mannerist-style". artsconnected.org. Archived from the original on 20 June 2012. Retrieved 9 January 2015.
^ John Shearman, "Maniera as an Aesthetic Ideal", in Cheney 2004, p. 37.
^ "Artist Info". www.nga.gov. Retrieved 6 May 2022.
^ Cheney 1997, p. 17.
^ Briganti 1962, p. 6.
^
a b Mirollo 1984, p. [page needed].
^ Shearman 1967.
^ Grossmann 1965.
^ Moffett, Marian; Fazio, Michael W.; Wodehouse, Lawrence (2003). A World History of Architecture. Laurence King Publishing. p. 330. ISBN 978-1-85669-371-4.; Bousquet, Jacques (1964). Mannerism: The Painting and Style of the Late Renaissance. Braziller.
^ Cheney[citation needed], "Preface", xxv–xxxii, and Manfred Wundram, "Mannerism," Grove Art Online. Oxford University Press, [accessed 23 April 2008].
^ "The brilliant neurotics of the late Renaissance". The Spectator. 17 May 2014.
^
a b Freedberg 1993, pp. 175–177.
^
a b Giorgio Vasari, Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects.
^ Redazione. "The Battle of Cascina: when Michelangelo competed with Leonardo da Vinci". Finestre sull' Arte. Danae Project srl. Retrieved 6 March 2025.
^
a b Friedländer, Walter (1965). Mannerism and Anti-Mannerism in Italian Painting. Schocken Books. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-8052-0094-2.
^ Manfred Wundram, "Mannerism," Grove Art Online. Oxford University Press, [accessed 23 April 2008].
^ Freedberg 1965, p. 191.
^ Shearman 1967, p. 19.
^ Briganti 1962, pp. 32–33.
^ Briganti 1962, p. 13.
^ Summerson 1983, pp. 157–172.
^ Olson, pp. 179–182.
^ Olson, pp. 183–187.
^ Olson, pp. 182–183.
^ Olson, pp. 194–202.
^
a b c d e f g h Marchetti Letta, Elisabetta (1995). Pontormo, Rosso Fiorentino. Constable. p. 6. ISBN 0094745501. OCLC 642761547.
^
a b c d e f g h i j k l Smart, Alastair (1972). The Renaissance and Mannerism in Northern Europe and Spain. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. p. 118.
^
a b c Cox-Rearick, Janet. "Pontormo, Jacopo da". Grove Art Online. Retrieved 1 April 2019.
^
a b c d e Cecchi, Alessandro; Bronzino, Agnolo; vans, Christopher E (1996). Bronzino. Antella, Florence: The Library of Great Masters. p. 20.
^ Stokstad, Marilyn; Cothren, Michael Watt (2011). Art History. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson/Prentice Hall. pp. 663. ISBN 9780205744220.
^
a b c d e Nichols, Tom (1 October 2015). Tintoretto : tradition and identity. Reaktion Books. p. 234. ISBN 9781780234816. OCLC 970358992.
^ "El Greco". National Gallery of Art. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
^ Christiansen, Keith (October 2004). "El Greco (1541–1614)". Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
^
a b c Marías, Fernando (2003). "Greco, El". Grove Art Online. doi:10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.T034199. ISBN 978-1-884446-05-4. Retrieved 1 April 2019.
^ Lambraki-Plaka, Marina (1999). El Greco-The Greek. Kastaniotis.: Ekdoseis Kastaniōtē. pp. 47–49. ISBN 960-03-2544-8.
^
a b Davies, David; Greco, J. H; Metropolitan Museum of Art; National Gallery (2003). El Greco. London: National Gallery Company. p. 245.
^ Murphy, Caroline (2003). Lavinia Fontana: a painter and her patrons in sixteenth-century Bologna. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300099134. OCLC 50478433.
^ Cheney, Liana (2000). Alicia Craig Faxon; Kathleen Lucey Russo (eds.). Self-portraits by women painters. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate. ISBN 1859284248. OCLC 40453030.
^ "Lavinia Fontana's nude Minervas". www.thefreelibrary.com. Retrieved 10 March 2019.
^
a b c d e f g Kaufmann, Thomas DaCosta (2010). Arcimboldo. University of Chicago Press. p. 167. doi:10.7208/chicago/9780226426884.001.0001. ISBN 9780226426877.
^ "Style Guide: Mannerism". Victoria and Albert. 19 December 2012. Retrieved 11 January 2015.
^ Wundram, Manfred (1996). Dictionary of Art. Grove. p. 281.
^ Peitcheva, Maria (2016). Michelangelo: 240 Colour Plates. StreetLib. p. 2. ISBN 978-88-925-7791-6.
^ [verification needed]Jarzombek, Mark (Winter 2005). "Pilaster Play" (PDF). Thresholds. 28: 34–41. doi:10.1162/thld_a_00320. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2022.
^ "Arquitectura Herreriana". www.arteespana.com (in Spanish). Retrieved 5 January 2019.
^ Arnold Hauser. Mannerism: The Crisis of the Renaissance and the Origins of Modern Art. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1965).
^
a b Venturi, Robert. "Architecture as Signs and Systems" (PDF). Retrieved 11 January 2015.
^ Coffin, David, The Villa in the Life of Renaissance Rome, Princeton University Press, 1979. pp. 281–285.
^ Ellul, Michael (2004). "In search of Girolamo Cassar: An unpublished manuscript at the State Archives of Lucca" (PDF). Melita Historica. XIV (1): 37. ISSN 1021-6952. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 March 2016.
^ "Historic Centre of Salvador de Bahia", World Heritage List, Paris, France: UNESCO.
^ "Mannerism: Bronzino (1503–1572) and his Contemporaries". Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
^ Wisse, Authors: Jacob. "Northern Mannerism in the Early Sixteenth Century | Essay | The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History". The Met’s Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. Retrieved 22 June 2024.
^ Baldick 2015; Greene 2012.
^ "Gale eBooks – Document – John Donne". go.gale.com. Retrieved 3 February 2020.
^ Gardner, Helen (1957). Metaphysical Poets. Oxford University Press, London. ISBN 9780140420388. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
^ Carter 1991, 128.
^ Apel 1946–1947, p. 20.
^
a b Castagno 1994, p. [page needed].
^ Barnes, Ernie. Interview, "Personal Diaries" with Ed Gordon, BET, 1990.
^ Greenway, Peter. Interview, "Cinema of Ideas" with Henk Oosterling, 2001.
^
a b Saltz, Jerry (10 October 2013). "Jerry Saltz on Art's Insidious New Cliché: Neo-Mannerism". Vulture. Retrieved 16 August 2014.
^ 'Nice' in the sense of 'finely reasoned.'
References[edit]
Apel, Willi. 1946–1947. "The French Secular Music of the Late Fourteenth Century". Acta Musicologica 18: 17–29.
Baldick, Chris (2015). "Mannerism". The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms (Online Version) (4th ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191783234.
Briganti, Giuliano (1962). Italian Mannerism. Translated by Kunzle, Margaret. London, England: Thames and Hudson.
Carter, Tim. 1991. Music in Late Renaissance and Early Baroque Italy. London: Amadeus Press. ISBN 0-9313-4053-5[verification needed]
Castagno, Paul C. (1994). The Early Commedia Dell'arte (1550–1621): The Mannerist Context. New York: P. Lang. ISBN 0-8204-1794-7.
Cheney, Liana de Girolami (ed.). 2004. Readings in Italian Mannerism, second printing, with a foreword by Craig Hugh Smyth. New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 0-8204-7063-5. (Previous edition, without the foreword by Smyth, New York: Peter Lang, 1997. ISBN 0-8204-2483-8).
Cox-Rearick, Janet. "Pontormo, Jacopo da." Grove Art Online.11 April 2019. http://www.oxfordartonline.com/groveart/view/10.1093/gao/9781884446054.001.0001/oao-9781884446054-e-7000068662.
Davies, David, Greco, J. H Elliott, Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, New York), and National Gallery (Great Britain). El Greco. London, England: National Gallery Company, 2003.
Freedberg, Sidney J. (1965). "Observations on the Painting of the Maniera". The Art Bulletin. 47 (2): 187–197. doi:10.1080/00043079.1965.10788836. Reprinted in Cheney 2004, pp. 116–123.
Freedberg, Sidney J. (1971). Painting in Italy, 1500–1600 (1st ed.). Harmondsworth and Baltimore: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-056035-1.
Freedberg, Sidney J. (1993). Painting in Italy, 1500–1600 (3rd ed.). New Haven, Connecticut and London, England: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-05587-0.
Friedländer, Walter (1965). Mannerism and Anti-Mannerism in Italian Painting. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0805231536.
Gombrich, Ernst Hans. 1995. The Story of Art, sixteenth edition. London, England: Phaidon Press. ISBN 0-7148-3247-2.
Greene, Roland; et al., eds. (2012). "Mannerism". The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics (4th rev. ed.). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-15491-6.
Grossmann, F. (1965). Between Renaissance and Baroque: European Art: 1520–1600. Manchester City Art Gallery.
Kaufmann, Thomas DaCosta. Arcimboldo : Visual Jokes, Natural History, and Still-Life Painting. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 2010. ProQuest Ebook Central.
Lambraki-Plaka, Marina (1999). El Greco-The Greek. Kastaniotis. ISBN 960-03-2544-8.
Marchetti Letta, Elisabetta, Jacopo Da Pontormo, and Rosso Fiorentino. Pontormo, Rosso Fiorentino. The Library of Great Masters. Antella, Florence, Italy: Scala, p. 199.
Marías, Fernando. 2003 "Greco, El." Grove Art Online. 2 April 2019. http://www.oxfordartonline.com/groveart/view/10.1093/gao/9781884446054.001.0001/oao-9781884446054-e-7000034199.
Mirollo, James V. (1984). Mannerism and Renaissance Poetry: Concept, Mode, Inner Design. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-03227-7.
Nichols, Tom. Tintoretto : Tradition and Identity. London, England: Reaktion, 1999.
Shearman, John K. G. (1967). Mannerism. Style and Civilization. Harmondsworth: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-013759-9.
Olson, Roberta J.M., Italian Renaissance Sculpture, 1992, Thames & Hudson (World of Art), ISBN 9780500202531
Smart, Alastair. The Renaissance and Mannerism in Northern Europe and Spain. The Harbrace History of Art. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972.
Smyth, Craig Hugh. 1992. Mannerism and Maniera, with an introduction by Elizabeth Cropper. Vienna, Austria: IRSA. ISBN 3-900731-33-0.
Summerson, John (1983). Architecture in Britain 1530–1830. The Pelican History of Art (7th revised and enlarged (3rd integrated) ed.). Harmondsworth and New York: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-056003-3. [Reprinted with corrections, 1986; 8th edition, Harmondsworth and New York: Penguin, 1991.]
Stokstad, Marilyn, and Michael Watt Cothren. Art History. 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2011.
Further reading[edit]
Cohen, M. (2005). “Manners” Make the Man: Politeness, Chivalry, and the Construction of Masculinity, 1750–1830. Journal of British Studies, 44(2), 312–329. https://doi.org/10.1086/427127
Gardner, Helen Louise. 1972. The Metaphysical Poets, Selected and Edited, revised edition. Introduction. Harmondsworth, England; New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-042038-X.
Hall, Marcia B . 2001. After Raphael: Painting in Central Italy in the Sixteenth Century, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-48397-2.
Pinelli, Antonio. 1993. La bella maniera: artisti del Cinquecento tra regola e licenza. Turin: Piccola biblioteca Einaudi. ISBN 88-06-13137-0
Sypher, Wylie. 1955. Four Stages of Renaissance Style: Transformations in Art and Literature, 1400–1700. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday. A classic analysis of Renaissance, Mannerism, Baroque, and Late Baroque.
Würtenberger, Franzsepp. 1963. Mannerism: The European Style of the Sixteenth Century. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston (Originally published in German, as Der Manierismus; der europäische Stil des sechzehnten Jahrhunderts. Vienna: A. Schroll, 1962).
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mannerism.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Mannerism.
"Mannerism: Bronzino (1503–1572) and his Contemporaries", on the Metropolitan Museum of Art's website
show
vte
Premodern, Modern and Contemporary art movements








show
vte
Renaissance
Authority control databases: National
GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicSpainIsrael
Categories: MannerismArchitectural stylesArt movements in EuropeRenaissance artMannerist architectureWestern art16th century in art17th century in art

================================================================================

Title: TRƯỜNG PHÁI KIỂU CÁCH
URL: https://artforarch.vn/truong-phai-kieu-cach-n86445.html

Từ những năm 1520, một phong cách hội họa mới đã phát triển với nỗ lực thúc đẩy những thành tựu của nghệ thuật Phục hưng Dỉnh cao tiên sxa hơn nữa, nhưng phong cách này lại thường đánh mất sự hài hòa vì chỉ tập trung vào các hiệu ứng và sự điêu luyện.
Xuất phát từ một tiếng Italy "maniera" có nghĩa là bút pháp hay phong cách, trường phái Kiểu cách là một trào lưu hội họa được hình thành vào khoảng năm 1510 đến năm 1520 ở Italy bởi các họa sĩ đang ngày càng đề cao tính độc đáo hơn tất thảy. Từ này ban đầu được sử dụng vơi smucj đích mô tả sự ưu tú chuẩn mực mà giai đoạn Phục hưng Đỉnh cao đã đạt được và gắn liền vơi stoanf bộ nền nghệ thuật ngày nay, nhưng trên thực tế sự chuẩn mực này đã dẫn đến việc kiểu cách hóa và trở thành một phong cách nghệ thuật nhằm "phô trương nghệ thuật", đôi khi điều này cũng đạt được những thành công lớn - chẳng hạn như tác phâm rở Mantua của Giulio Romano (kh.1499-1546), học trò của Raphael. Trường phái kiểu cách mang hàm ý tiêu cực khi nó trở thành một điều ám ảnh và khi phong cách nghệ thuật này trở nên quá tải hoặc làm lu mờ đi những gì đang được thể hiện: với những nguyên tắc mới đối với nghệ thuật tôn giáo, Hội đồng Trent đã phản đối gay gắt sự phô trương thừa thải của chủ nghĩa Kiểu cách. Mặc dù khái niệm này thường chủ yếu được sử dụng trong nền nghệ thuật Italy, nhưng cũng có một trào lưu Kiểu cách ở phương Bắc. Các họa sĩ Kiểu cách phương Bắc, điển hình là họa sĩ tài năng Hendrick Goltzius (1558-1617) và Bartholomeus Spranger (1546-1611), là những người đã tạo nên những tác phẩm thần thoại phức tạp với tư thế nhân vật uyển chuyển.
Chúa giáng sinh, Antonio da Correggio, khoảng năm 1529-1530
XƯỞNG TRANH SƠN DẦU ART FOR ARCH
Gallery 1 : 106 Lý Nhật Quang – Sơn Trà – Đà Nẵng
Gallery 2 : 177 Phan Đăng Lưu – Hải Châu – Đà Nẵng
Hotline : 0911.059.419
Website:  http://artforarch.vn/ 
  #Xưởng_tranh_sơn_dầu_Đà_Nẵng
#Xưởng_tranh_treo_tường_Đà_Nẵng
#Thế_giới_tranh_sơn_dầu
#Phòng_tranh_sơn_dầu_treo_tường_Đà_Nẵng
#Art_For_Arch
#Art_Gallery_Đà_Nẵng
#Shop_bán_tranh_sơn_dầu_treo_tường_tại_Đà_Nẵng
#177_Phan_Đăng_Lưu_Đà_Nẵng
#106_Lý_Nhật_Quang_Đà_Nẵng

================================================================================

Title: Trường phái Kiểu cách, trào lưu hội họa Hậu Phục hưng
URL: https://designs.vn/truong-phai-kieu-cach-trao-luu-hoi-hoa-hau-phuc-hung/

Trường phái Kiểu cách, trào lưu hội họa Hậu Phục hưng
29/08/2019Mai Anh
Trong suốt thời kỳ Phục hưng, họa sĩ Ý được truyền cảm hứng từ những tác phẩm cổ trung đại mang vẻ đẹp hài hòa và tinh tế. Nổi bật trong giai đoạn này là hai danh họa xuất chúng Michelangelo và Leonardo da Vinci. Trường phái Kiểu cách chính là phong trào hội họa Hậu Phục hưng.
Các nghệ sĩ thuộc trường phái Kiểu cách đã tìm tòi và sáng tạo dựa trên nền tảng kỹ thuật hội họa Phục hưng. Trong bài viết này, chúng ta hãy cùng tìm hiểu về lịch sử hình thành và phát triển cùng những đặc điểm nổi bật của trường phái nghệ thuật này.
Trường phái Kiểu cách là gì?
Trường phái Kiểu cách là một trào lưu hội họa xuất hiện vào năm 1503 và kéo dài trong một thế kỷ. Tên gọi ‘Kiểu cách’ (mannerism) có nguồn gốc từ tiếng Ý ‘maniera’ (nghĩa là ‘kiểu cách’). Nó phản ánh phong cách cường điệu và phóng đại của nghệ sĩ đương thời.
Joachim Wtewael, “Persus and Andromeda,” 1611
Được biết tới như phong trào nghệ thuật Hậu Phục hưng, trường phái Kiểu cách có khuynh hướng cường điệu hóa kho tàng tạo hình của Phục hưng, là cầu nối giữa giai đoạn đầu Phục hưng và giai đoạn Baroque về sau.
Lịch sử hình thành và phát triển
Vào cuối thế kỷ 15, số đông họa sĩ vùng Florence đã chuyển mình từ phong cách cổ đại sang cổ điển, mở đầu cho phong trào nghệ thuật Phục hưng diễn ra từ thế kỷ 15 đến thế kỷ 17 với ba giai đoạn: Sơ Phục hưng, Thịnh Phục hưng và Hậu Phục hưng.
Vào thời kỳ Sơ Phục hưng, các họa sĩ bắt đầu tìm cảm hứng từ những tác phẩm cổ xưa, là tiền đề cho sự ra đời của phong trào nghệ thuật thời kỳ Thịnh Phục hưng, được đánh dấu bằng những tác phẩm mang phong cách hiện thực hóa. Giai đoạn Thịnh Phục hưng kéo dài từ năm 1490 tới những năm 1530 cho tới khi trường phái Kiểu cách khởi sinh.
Mặc dù hứng thú với chủ nghĩa hoàn hảo của thời kỳ Thịnh Phục hưng, họa sĩ thuộc trường phái Kiểu cách không muốn sao chép một cách khuôn sáo. Thay vào đó, họ phóng đại những nguyên tắc sẵn có, thay thế tĩnh chỉ bằng hình thái động, chú trọng vào cảm xúc hơn là lý trí, biểu hiện nội tâm hơn là mô tả ngoại vật, dùng sức mạnh của tưởng tượng sáng tạo hơn là sao chép thiên nhiên. Ở góc nhìn nào đó, trường phái Kiểu cách biểu thị một cuộc nổi loạn chống lại không khí cân bằng hài hòa bình dị của Phục Hưng. Hội họa Phục Hưng luôn coi trọng sự cân bằng, tỷ lệ, còn trường phái Kiểu cách thì nhấn mạnh đến sự tao nhã trong trạng thái dị thường bất cân xứng. 
Đặc điểm nổi bật 
Hình ảnh phóng đại
Bản chất của trường phái Kiểu cách chính là cường điệu hóa. Được tiên phong bởi họa sĩ người Ý Parmigianino, các họa sĩ phái Kiểu cách bác bỏ lối vẽ với tỉ lệ chính xác, thay vào đó, họ diễn tả cơ thể con người được kéo dài chân tay và uốn cong trong một cử động mạnh. Kỹ thuật này phản ánh bước tiến của hội họa và gia tăng nét đặc sắc cho tác phẩm.
Parmigianino, “Madonna with Long Neck,” 1534-1540
Theo như Giorgio Vasari, một họa sĩ, kiến trúc sư, nhà sử học và nhà văn xuất chúng người Ý, Parmigianino đã vô tình khám phá ra lối vẽ này khi đang họa chân dung bản thân. “Nghiên cứu về nét tinh tế của hội họa,”, Vasari đề cập tới Parmigianino trong quyển sách lịch sử hội họa nổi tiếng của mình, ‘Cuộc đời các danh họa’, “ngày nọ, ông tiến hành bức chân dung tự họa, nhìn vào chiếc gương tròn, ông nhận thấy hiệu ứng kì lạ lên hình ảnh phản chiếu. Cánh tay của chủ thể ở mặt trước cong vòng lên theo mặt cong của kính, và người xem tranh cũng thấy được sự biến dạng tương tự ở cái cửa sổ phía trên bên trái, góc mái nhà ở phía trên bên phải. Điều này thôi thúc ông áp dụng hiệu ứng đó vào tác phẩm”.
Parmigianino, “Self-Portrait in a Convex Mirror,” ca. 1523-1524 
Nghệ thuật trang trí
Để nâng tầm hội họa thời Phục hưng, họa sĩ phái Kiểu cách đưa vào tác phẩm những khung cảnh, sự trang hoàng xa hoa. Ngược lại với thế hệ họa sĩ thịnh Phục hưng, họa sĩ Sơ Phục hưng thường kết hợp nhiều họa tiết vào tác phẩm. Được truyền cảm hứng từ tấm thảm millefleur thời Trung đại (nghĩa là ‘hàng nghìn bông hoa’ trong tiếng Pháp), Botticelli đã đưa họa tiết hoa cỏ vào những bức họa thần thoại lớn mà tiêu biểu là ‘Primavera’.
Botticelli, “Primavera,” ca. c. 1477–1482 
Lần lượt từng họa sĩ phái Kiểu cách đều nảy sinh hứng thú với nghệ thuật trang trí này, họ phủ đầy bức vẽ cùng tác phẩm điêu khắc với vô vàn ý tưởng. Đỉnh cao của phong cách này là danh họa Giuseppe Arcimboldo, người đã thực hiện hàng loạt bức chân dung độc nhất vô nhị từ cây cỏ, động vật hoặc bất kỳ một chất liệu nào có thế.
Giuseppe Arcimboldo, “Spring,” 1573 
Bảng màu độc lạ
Cuối cùng, họa sĩ phái Kiểu cách từ chối sử dụng những màu sắc phổ biến từ thời kỳ Thịnh Phục hưng, thay vào đó, họ sử dụng màu tự chế, đặc biệt là những gam màu rực rỡ. Điều này được thể hiện rõ nét qua các tác phẩm của danh họa người Ý Jacopo da Pontormo, người đã đã đưa kỹ thuật sử dụng màu sắc của thời đại Phục hưng lên một tầm cao mới.
Pontormo, “The Deposition,” 1526-1528 
El Greco, một họa sĩ Kiểu cách người Tây Ban Nha cũng khá nổi tiếng với kỹ thuật này khi chuyển tới Rome. Như những họa sĩ Kiểu cách khác, El Greco học hỏi nhiều từ thế hệ đi trước mà vẫn giữ được cái ‘tôi’ trong hội họa. 
El Greco, “The Vision of Saint John, or The Opening of the Fifth Seal,” ca. 1609-1614 
Di sản 
Là một trong những trào lưu hội họa có tầm ảnh hưởng lớn của thời kỳ Phục hưng nhưng Trường phái Kiểu cách không được đón nhận rộng rãi như những phong trào nghệ thuật trước đó. Dù vậy, những tìm tòi và sáng tạo của nghệ sĩ phái Kiểu cách là tiền đề quan trọng cho sự ra đời của những trường phái nghệ thuật về sau. 
Triển lãm Trường phái nghệ thuật Kiểu cách
Có thể bạn quan tâm
> 5 sự kết hợp tạo nên những bức ảnh đẹp hơn
> Tranh sơn dầu Việt Nam
> Nguyễn Gia Trí: "Tôi sáng tác bằng tâm linh" – Lời tâm sự từ cha đẻ những bức tranh sơn mài tân thời của Việt Nam
Tags: chú giải, Định nghĩa, Kiểu cách, lịch sử, Mỹ thuật, mỹ thuật thế giới, nghệ thuật
Điều hướng bài viết
Trả lời
Email của bạn sẽ không được hiển thị công khai. Các trường bắt buộc được đánh dấu *
Bình luận *
Tên *
Email *
Lưu tên của tôi và email trong trình duyệt này cho lần bình luận kế tiếp của tôi.

================================================================================

Title: Lịch sử hội họa – Part 17: Mannerism – Một lối vượt thoát Phục Hưng
URL: https://hocviennhiepanh.com/lich-su-hoi-hoa-part-17-mannerism-mot-loi-vuot-thoat-phuc-hung/

Chữ “Mannerism” (Anh), hay “Mannierism” (Pháp) xưa nay chưa có chữ nào thỏa “đáng hay tương thích trong tiếng Việt. Một số dịch giả , chuyên cũng như không chuyên về mỹ thuật, thường tra lấy “nghĩa đen” tự điển ra dùng tạm, gọi nó là “kiểu cách, phong cách Mannerism”! Quả thật, nếu tra gốc từ chữ Ý thì “di maniera” cũng có nghĩa đen như thế.
Theo thiển ý, đây là một từ ngữ nên tảng của mỹ thuật sử, vì vậy ta nên căn cứ vào dữ kiện lịch sử mà đặt một tên Việt tương thích nội dung, chứ không nên dịch nghĩa đen. Trước tiên Mannerism được sử gia dùng để chỉ thị một giai đoạn tiếp nối thời đại Phục hưng cực thịnh (High Renaissance) và thời đại cải cách văn hóa (Baroque). Theo diễn tiến lịch sử mỹ thuật, thế kỷ 15 được gọi chung là thời Phục hưng (Renaissance), thế kỷ 16 gồm hai giai đoạn: Phục Hưng cực thịnh (tính đến năm thiên tài Raphael quá cố). Thịnh kỳ Phục hưng được đánh dấu bằng ba thiên tài Leonardo, Michelangelo và Raphael. Họ được tôn vinh là những bậc thánh (dinno), các đế vương thi nhau sưu tập từ những mảnh phác họa, bút ký cho đến danh tác của họ.
GIAI ĐOẠN ĐẦU
Ban đầu, phong cách hội họa ở Florence nổi bật ở một số họa sĩ đã đạt tới địa vị tối cao trong thời Phục hưng cực thịnh. Họa phẩm của họ vẽ rất tinh tế, nhằm tạo sự phấn khích và tình cảm cao độ cho người thưởng ngoạn.
Bằng bàn tay, con tim và khối óc siêu việt của họ, mọi vấn đề biểu hiện thực tại đã được giải quyết toàn bộ và toàn hảo, nghệ thuật Tây phương đã đạt tới điểm tuyệt đối hoàn hảo, khiến cho thế hệ sau cảm thấy hầu như không còn làm được gì hơn.
Tuy nhiên, lịch sử cho thấy thế hệ kế tiếp đã xuất hiện những danh tài mới như Pontormo, Rosso, Bronzino, Parmigiano và Cellini. Họ không tự nhận là hơn, nhưng họ đã thực sự tạo một kiểu thức khác và lạ, bằng cảm thức thời đại độc đáo của mình – thời Hậu Phục hưng. Sau cái chết của thiên tài Raphael, là sinh lộ mới với những danh tác, như Madonna With the Long Neck (Thánh Mẫu cổ thiên nga) của Parmigiano, Resurrection (Chúa Phục Sinh) của El Greco V…. Họ đã thay thế những tỉ lệ | tĩnh chỉ bằng hình thái động, chú trọng vào cảm xúc hơn là lý trí, biểu hiện nội tâm hơn là mô tả ngoại vật, dùng sức mạnh của tưởng tượng sáng tạo hơn là sao chép thiên nhiên. Nghệ thuật Hậu Phục hưng thế kỷ 16 khiến ta liên tưởng đến thế hệ Hậu Ấn tượng với những Cezanne, Gauguin, Van Gogh vào hậu bán thế kỷ 19. Họ đều tiếp nối thế hệ trước bằng ý hướng tương phản hay bố túc. Cái “Hậu” của thế kỷ 16 hiển nhiên là một thái độ phản ứng đối với phong cách Phục hưng, y như cái “Hậu” của thế kỷ 19.
Bức “Moses và con gái của Jethro”, Rosso vẽ năm 1523, khổ 117 x 160cm.
Họa sĩ Rosso (tên họ là Giovanni Battista di Jacopo, 1494-1540) gốc Pháp, hiệu là Rosso Fiorentino, hay “Người Florentine”. Ông là người “mát nặng”, nghệ thuật của ông ngông nghênh khác thường. Ông dùng gam màu táo bạo, chỏi nhau, hình dạng ông vẽ choán cả bức tranh, như bức “Moses oà con gái của Jethro, nhân vật lõa thể vẽ to lớn, cử chỉ kích động, giống như người vật lộn của Michelangelo, chen vào đó là một cô gái nhợt nhạt, kinh hoàng, bán thân lõa lồ, đứng chết trận giữa đám người hỗn loạn. Rosso thể hiện ý tưởng bạo lực một cách cô đọng, lạ lùng.
Pontormo (Jacopo Carucci, 1494-1556) cũng là một họa sĩ “loạn tâm thần”, thỉnh thoảng ông tách biệt cuộc sống để chui rút vào nơi hẻo lánh. Cũng như Rosso, tác phẩm của ông kích động và lạ lùng khiến chúng ta phải xúc động.
Bức “Chân dung thanh niên”, Andrea del Sarto vẽ năm 1517, khổ 57 x 73cm.
Andrea del Sarto (1486-1531) là thầy của Rosso và Pontormo. “Chân dung thanh niên”, là một tác phẩm đơn sắc, thể hiện tài vận dụng màu đơn trong tranh của Andrea del Sarto và một số tác phẩm đương thời. Ông đã được liệt vào hàng họa sĩ trong danh gia tứ trụ.
Bức “Hạ xác Chúa”, Pontormo vẽ năm 1525, khổ 190 x 312cm.
Họa phẩm siêu tuyệt “Hạ xác Chúa của Pontormo, bày trên bàn thành trong nhà nguyện ở Florence, ánh sáng chiếu trong tranh như phát quang, một phần để bù cho nhà nguyện âm u, phần còn lại phản chiếu cảm giác mạnh mẽ, tình cảm mất mát, tổn thương, tạo hình tương phản giữa cái đẹp thể hình thuôn dài, và vẻ mặt lo âu, bối rối lẫn thương xót. Bức Giáo chủ della Casa trông thật lỗi lạc, khuôn mặt cao quí, cố kéo dài, được bộ râu đỏ che bớt. Sau ông có tường bao quanh chắc chắn, tia mắt chiếu ra như thách thức người ta và đượm vẻ kiêu kỳ.
Bức “Giáo chủ della Casa”, Pontormo vẽ năm 1541-1544, khổ 79 x 102cm.
ẢO ẢNH LẠNH LẼO
Họa sĩ Pontormo là thầy và đỡ đầu cho tài nghệ lạ lùng của họa sĩ Agnolo Bronzino (1503-1572). Kiểu sống ẩn dật của Pontormo cũng thể hiện Bronzino. Đây có thể do Pontormo là người cuồng tín trong tôn giáo, nên đã ảnh hướng sâu đậm vào những họa phẩm được ông bảo trợ. Ở Bronzino, ta cũng thấy rực lên sự lạnh lẽo khiến ta nhìn, dù vẫn bội phục tài ba của ông.
Bức “Chân dung Eleanor di Toledo”, Agnolo Bronzino vẽ năm 1560, khổ 65 x 85cm.
Triều đình đương thời không phải không bị tranh ông hấp dẫn, tuy nhiên, các bức chân dung ông vẽ, dù có vị đắng, lạnh, vẫn được ngưỡng mộ. Ông nghiễm nhiên là nhân vật dẫn đầu trong cao trào Hậu Phục hưng (MannerList). Bức Chân dung Eleanor di Toledo được ông khoác lên bộ y phục sang trọng, đầy hoa văn hình quả lê và vẻ lạnh lùng.
Bức “Ngụ ngôn Vệ nữ và thần Cupid”, Agnolo Bronzino vẽ năm 1545, khổ 116 x 146cm.
Bức “Ngụ ngôn Vệ nữ và Thần Cupid” từng được biết đến với tên Vệ nữ, tiểu thần tình yêu và thời gian của Bronzino, đã được Cosimo I đặt vẽ ở Florence để tặng cho Hoàng đế Francis I. Bức họa này được nhà phê bình nghệ thuật Vasari cho là nó “nói lên” nhiều ngụ ý về thú đam mê trần tục và các mối nguy bất định, ẩn náu dưới đó. Có người liệt nó vào chuyện loạn luân. Mãi đến cuối thế kỷ 20 (1986) một bác sĩ đã nhiệt liệt tán dương, giải thích rằng: tác giả ngụ ý mục đồng là kẻ đầu tiên mắc bệnh giang mai. Ở bên trái, có bộ mặt thống khổ, điểm vào triệu chứng bệnh hoạn và một hai hiệu quả phụ về chữa trị ở thế kỷ 16. Ngụ ý tình yêu bất chính sẽ sinh bệnh giang mai, mọc mụn lỗ chỗ như tổ ong, bằng hình ảnh đứa trẻ ham vui thú xác thịt thì hậu quả đau khố khó thoát. Thời gian trôi qua sẽ nảy ra chứng bệnh, khi giật phăng phông xanh, để lộ điều ẩn dấu trong Vệ Nữ và tiểu thần ái tình Cupid.
TINH THẦN CORREGGIO
Họa sĩ mang tinh thần kiểu thức Hậu Phục hưng là Correggio (tên họ: Antonio Allegri, 1489-1534). Ông sống ở Parma, là một trong nhiều họa sĩ vĩ đại, trong ông có ý thức mạnh mẽ về ánh sáng và đặc điểm tinh thần. Correggio là hậu bối của họa sĩ đại gia Mantegna nội tâm vững mạnh, thổi vào hồn ông đầy sự hợp lý và còn rất đáng yêu nữa.
Bức “Thần Vệ nữ, dâm thần Satyr và Cupid”, Correggio vẽ năm 15241525, khổ 124 x 190cm.
Khúc ngoặt đáng kể trong đời nghệ sĩ của Correggio sau thời gian ông đến Roma (trong thời trẻ), nhờ chiêm ngưỡng các danh tác của Michelangelo và của Raphael. Chẳng bao lâu, ông trở thành một trong những nghệ sĩ hàng đầu ở Parma. Bức Thần Kệ nữ, dâm thần Satur và Cupid hoàn toàn buông thả xác thịt, tuy trinh trắng về thân xác, mô tả sinh hoạt tình cảm trước thời bị đuổi khỏi vườn địa đàng (Eden), mỗi thân xác phản chiếu ánh trăng cách riêng, tỷ lệ sai biệt có phần tế nhị, nhưng vì thế mà đạo lý ổn thỏa.
Bức “Hôn nhân bí ẩn của Nữ thánh Catherine”, Correggio vẽ năm 15101515, khổ 21 x 28cm.
Có thứ xác thịt ngọt ngào giống nhau như thế trong tranh tôn giáo của ông, như bức “Hôn nhân bí ẩn của Nữ thánh Catherine”. Theo truyền thuyết, Catherine có mộng triệu, thấy Chúa Hài Đồng đưa bà nhẫn đính hôn, sự thật chẳng phải vậy, mà nó chứa ý sâu xa, dâng hiến trên hết là nguyện thề trong trắng. Thánh Catherine quì gối, quên cả đồng môn đang cúi mình tỏ lòng kính trọng. Cả bức họa tuy nhỏ nhưng tình cảm dạt dào, truyền đạt lý thiêng liêng.
Họa sĩ Correggio quan trọng ở chỗ ông là điểm nối của Phục hưng sang phong cách mới. Thực ra, ông đóng góp rất lớn vào biểu thức Hậu Phục hưng và Baroque, nhất là bích họa thần kỳ trên vòm trần đại thánh đường ở Parma.
Rủi thay, bích họa này không sao chép được nên chúng tôi và khán giả đành đứng trong thánh đường Parma ngửa Cổ ngắm nghía bức “Thánh Nữ Đồng Trinh Thăng Thiên”, đến thánh đường San Giovanni Evangelista, lại ngóng lên mà thán phục bức “Cánh mộng của Thánh John truyền Phúc âm”. Họa sĩ đã khéo tận dụng tài năng kỹ xảo phi thường của phong cách tận mỹ.
NÉT TAO NHÃ CỦA PARMIGIANINO
Bức “Đức Mẹ cố thiên nga”, Parmigianino vẽ năm 1534-1540, khổ 132 x 215cm.
Parmigianino (Girolamo Francesco Maria Mazzola, 1503-1540) là một nghệ sĩ tao nhã tuyệt đỉnh, đã thu tóm mọi chất duyên dáng vào kiệt tác “Đức Mẹ cổ thiên nga” là tác phẩm lẫy lừng và điển hình nhất của ông. Hình dáng Đức Mẹ trông tựa thiên nga. Bà ngồi giữa khung cảnh khói sương hoang phế, cổ bà cao đẹp, cả Chúa Hài Đồng cũng vậy. “Ngài” nằm thông trên đùi Đức Mẹ thật thoải mái, như trên đời không có lực làm rơi rớt. Trong đám đông, một thiên thần chân dài thanh tú, đẹp mê hồn. Nhìn chung, mọi thứ như theo một hướng bốc lên, tương tự cây cột mé sau, như muốn vươn lên trời và hút cả tầm mắt ta vào sự cuốn hút như thế.
DOSSI Ở FERRARA
Bức “Yêu nữ và người tình ngoài dã ngoại”, Dosso Dossi vẽ năm 1525, khổ 136 x 101cm.
Dosso Dossi (1490-1542), ông cũng theo phong cách mô tả ánh sáng kỳ dị như họa sĩ Parmigianino. Ông là họa sĩ cung đình dưới triều Lucregia Borgia, người ta đoán nàng Borgia đã gợi nguồn hứng khởi cho tác phẩm huyền ảo “Yêu nữ và người tình ngoài dã ngoại”. Đây là một bức họa mê hồn, gồm hai ấn ý, không những vì hiểu lầm thân xác nàng Circe, một chân ẩn sau áo quần. Mới nhìn ta thấy thiếu thiếu, như thể nàng ta bước ra từ một nơi xa xôi nào. Nhóm đàn ông bị hóa thành thú vật vừa gây xúc động lại pha nét khôi hài qua tài nghệ quái ác mà hợp tình theo gợi ý của nữ chủ Borgia. Tuy Yêu nữ Circe mang nét mặt khao khát, và có lẽ điểm nhấn mạnh nhất trong tranh là nỗi buồn và sự mong mỏi.
LOTTO Ở VENICE
Bức “Nữ thánh Catherine”, Lorenzo Lotto vẽ năm 1522, khổ 50 x 57cm.
Họa sĩ này cũng lấy hứng từ lòng buồn dạt dào, tên họ ông là Lorenzo Lotto (1480-1556), đặc tính nổi bật của ông là diễn tả cao độ, khéo pha trộn nét u buồn chê chán trong tính hiếu kỳ ta thường gặp. Ông luôn làm ta giao động, dẫn ta vào sự trầm tư. Màu sắc của ông chịu ảnh hưởng của Giovanni Bellini ở Venice. Đặc biệt Lotto rất nổi tiếng về chân dung, số phận lạ lùng và tầm nhìn sâu sắc của ông đã vén ra một chân trời “muôn hồng ngàn tía”. Dù đó là một hình tượng tôn giáo, nó vẫn sáng tạo khác thường, như trong bức “Nữ thánh Catherine “bà nghiêng cái đầu duyên dáng và ngắm chúng ta đầy vẽ tư lự. Bà dấu bớt vòng gai trước chiếc áo choàng xanh lá cây, và buông đôi tay mũm mĩm xuống trước ngực. Chúng ta khó tin Catherine là nữ thánh mà chỉ là một phụ nữ đích thực, được Lotto vẽ ra hết sức minh bạch.
BECCAFUMI Ở SIENA
Bức “Thiên thần thất sủng nổi loạn”, Domenico Beccafuni vẽ năm 1524, khổ 225 x 345cm.
Domenico Beccafumi (1485-1551), đại danh họa cuối cùng người Sienese trong thời Phục hưng cực thịnh, cũng như Dossi, là đại danh họa cuối cùng người Ferrarese. Ông không phải là một nghệ sĩ dễ dãi, đặc biệt khi ông chuyển sắc đột ngột từ tối ra sáng, các nhân dạng có tầm vóc kỳ dị, vẽ bằng màu gắt, làm ta nhớ lại phong cách hậu phục hưng Florentine của họa sĩ Rosso Fiorentino. Nhân dáng của Beccafumi, vẽ ra ngồn ngộn trước mắt ta như hỗn độn. Ông vận dụng tầm xa gần theo mình một cách tinh vi như trong bức “Thiên thần thất sủng nổi loạn” là những hình dạng nhạt nhòa như ảo ảnh hoảng loạn, nhưng nó đã in đậm trong trí người Sienese vô cùng ngọt ngào.
EL GRECO: ẢO ẢNH ĐAM MÊ
Danh họa lừng lẫy hơn cả trong số họa sĩ Tây Ban Nha theo phong cách Hậu Phục hưng chính là El Greco (tên họ Domenicos Theotokopoulos, 1541-1614, biệt danh “El Greco” lấy tên từ đảo ông sinh ra ở Crete). Gốc gác nghệ thuật của ông khá đa dạng, ông đi Venice, Rome, Tây Ban Nha, sau cùng ở lại Toledo đến cuối đời. Ảnh hưởng giáo lý Thiên chúa giáo ông hấp thụ ở Tây Ban Nha, đã lộ ra trong tác phẩm của ông, trong đó niềm đam mê và kiềm chế theo niềm tin và chủ nghĩa Plato cách tân, đã quấn quít đan xen cùng với sự mật nhiệm, chống lại phải cải cách Giáo hội La Mã trong thế kỷ 16.
Greco vẽ nhân vật nào cũng kéo dài. Ông vẽ gam màu mạnh mẽ lạ thường và phổ niềm đam mê của ông vào chủ đề một cách nồng nhiệt, mọi cái đó hòa trộn, tạo ra một phong cách rất riêng, rất độc đáo. Chính ông là ngòi nổ vĩ đại, đồng thời cũng là nút chặn ngòi. Đó còn là cái nhãn trần trụi, đóng thẳng vào mọi họa phẩm ông sáng tác. Thêm vào gia tài phong phú cho thành viên, Florence và Siena, ông còn nhồi vào đó truyền thống Byzantine, không chỉ là hình mà còn là tinh thần (dù trước kia ông chuyên học vẽ hình tượng ở đảo Crete). El Greco thường vẽ tượng thờ, nên nó đã đúc kết trong tâm tư ông một hồn thiêng lạ lùng.
Bức “Đức Mẹ, Chúa Hài Đồng và các thảnh”,  El Greco vẽ năm 1597-1599, khổ 103 x 194cm.
Trong họa phẩm “Đức Mẹ, Chúa Hài Đồng và các thánh” từ con sư tử của nữ thánh Marrina, con cừu của thánh Agnès, hút lên tạo nét cân bằng, cành cọ chỉ sự Tử vì đạo mảnh mai như búp măng. Chúng ta bị cuốn hút lên khó cưỡng lại qua mặt các tiểu thiên thần và bộ y phục mượt mà của Đức Mẹ, khiến làn mây chênh chếch bên trên kỳ lạ, mỏng manh như tờ mây, cuồn cuộn bay lên xuyên tà áo của Mẹ. Chúng ta như được kéo vào giữa và trên Chúa Hài Đồng, và trên nét mặt trái soan bình yên của Mẹ. Theo đường chuyển động, mắt ta chịu sự điều động của El Greco trong khi ở mấy góc, các khuôn mặt cầu nguyện, kiềm ta ở nguyên vị.
CÂU HỎI CÒN ĐÓ
Bức “Laocoỏn”, El Greco vẽ năm 1610, khổ 173 x 137cm.
El Greco chủ về điều khiển tâm linh, mà lớn nhất, tuyệt nhất là sức chủ động lôi kéo của ông. Kể cả khi ta chưa thực hiểu tranh, như trong bức “Laocoòn”, chúng ta không ngờ điềm gở diễn ra đã tự giới hạn mình tham gia vào đó. Rõ ràng giáo sĩ thành Troie và hai con ông ta. Nhưng mấy phụ nữ trần truồng là ai? Một người dường như có hai đầu? Và nếu xem như có cái đầu kia vì tranh chưa vẽ xong thì chẳng hợp tí nào. Bức Laocoòn được vẽ thêm vào, sau khi El Greco qua đời, và “cái đầu thứ hai” nhìn vào ta thấy đã bị xóa sạch, trong khi hai người trần truồng bên phải được đóng khố nhưng sau này chi tiết đó được phục hồi đúng như hình dạng ta thấy bây giờ.
Hai con rắn gầy yếu vậy nhưng không hiểu sao hai người mạnh khỏe thế kia mà phải lúng túng với chúng? Chúng ta cảm thấy đó là ngụ ý chứ không phải vậy – mà là cái ác và sự quyến rũ lấn lướt cuộc sống con người. Kể cả núi non và gió mây trên trời cũng thiếu vẻ thực, lộ rõ tính hư ảo, siêu thực.
Càng biết ít, ta càng bị mê hoặc trước họa phẩm này chỗ nó ẩn giấu ý nghĩa mà El Greco quan tâm bậc nhất. Do đó ông đã truyền thông tính cách hơn là chất liệu, toát ánh le lói, dù chúng ta không giải quyết được các bí ẩn vẫn không cảm thấy nó xa lạ, mà không một nghệ sĩ đương thời nào có thể đẩy tính cách lên và duy trì nó ở mức cao độ được như El Greco.
  Credit
—
Images from wikimedia.com
  Bài viết Lịch sử hội họa – Part 17: Mannerism – Một lối vượt thoát Phục Hưng đã xuất hiện đầu tiên vào ngày Học chụp ảnh – Chụp ảnh sản phẩm – Chụp ảnh doanh nghiệp – ChimkudoPro.
THÁNG MỘT 4, 2019
ART
MỸ THUẬT

================================================================================

Title: TRƯỜNG PHÁI KIỂU CÁCH: MỘT GIAI ĐOẠN KÌ DỊ CỦA HỘI HỌA Ý
URL: https://bookhunter.vn/truong-phai-kieu-cach-mot-giai-doan-ki-di-cua-hoi-hoa-y/

Xem
TRƯỜNG PHÁI KIỂU CÁCH: MỘT GIAI ĐOẠN KÌ DỊ CỦA HỘI HỌA Ý
Minh Hùng
12/08/2019
Trường phái kiểu cách (Mannerism) là một trào lưu nghệ thuật xuất phát ở Ý khoảng từ 1520 tới 1580, tiếp sau thời kỳ Phục Hưng. Các nghệ sĩ trường phái kiểu cách chủ trương đề cao kỹ thuật, cần sảnh sỏi, cố dụng tâm làm sao cho thanh cao. Họ tôn thờ cái đẹp ưu khoái lạc đến mức kỳ dị, ngôn ngữ bất thường. Nghệ thuật kiểu cách bị xem như sa sút, kém hài hòa và duyên dáng so với thế hệ trước đó – Lịch sử mỹ thuật thế giới của Phạm Thị Chỉnh, trang 118. Nhà xuất bản Đại học Sư phạm năm 2008.
Rốt cục thì thời đại kiểu cách, phong cách của trường phái kiểu cách (mannerism) chính xác là cái gì? Nói một cách đơn giản, nó là đáp án khả dĩ cho câu hỏi mà nghệ thuật phương Tây đặt ra suốt thời kỳ đỉnh cao Phục Hưng: “Đến đây rồi thì chúng ta sẽ đi tiếp đến đâu?”. 
Trong hơn ba thế kỷ, các nghệ sĩ đã nỗ lực hoàn thiện kỹ thuật hội họa để gợi lại chất lượng nghệ thuật cổ đại được tìm thấy từ Hy Lạp và La Mã, để tôn vinh những vị thần của Kinh Thánh mà họ rất mực tôn sùng. Mục tiêu của họ là hoàn toàn loại bỏ những thủ pháp nghệ thuật cổ xưa như việc phối cảnh theo thứ bậc, ở đó những nhân vật “quan trọng” được miêu tả to lớn hơn những ai được xem là không mấy quan trọng. Mục đích khác còn là để hoàn thiện những kỹ thuật như phối cảnh không gian, qua việc vẽ rút gọn theo luật xa gần (foreshortening) và để các sắc thái mờ hòa vào nhau (sfumato) vốn tạo nên độ chân thực cho chiều sâu và không gian trong bức tranh. Họa sĩ Phục Hưng muốn hoàn thiện những thứ như là “chiaroscuro” (sự phối hợp màu sáng tối trong hội họa), để ánh sáng và bóng tối dường như phát ra từ cùng một nguồn duy nhất, và tạo ra cảm giác chân thực bằng việc vẽ lại chính xác tỷ lệ người và vật. Họ khao khát kiến tạo cái đẹp trong màu sắc, hình khối và xúc cảm. 
Như vậy, với các nghệ sĩ châu Âu mà chúng ta gọi là “Phục Hưng đời đầu” – “những họa sĩ như Giotto di Bondone (1266 – 1337) , rồi đến thời kỳ đỉnh cao Phục Hưng với cái chết của Raffaello Sanzio da Rubino (hay “Raphael”) (1483-1520), và Albrecht Durer (1471 – 1527), toàn bộ tâm sức của họ dồn vào hoàn thành những mục đích trên đây. Thế nhưng, thật đáng kinh ngạc, họ bằng nỗ lực đã đạt đến tuyệt đích, không ai mảy may nghĩ đến chuyện giờ đây khi đã ở đỉnh cao của tranh vẽ hai chiều, hội họa phương Tây sẽ biết đi về đâu. Cần phải hiểu, những mục đích trên kia vốn được coi như là một lời kêu gọi thiêng liêng, nó luôn là một cái đích trước mắt, một lý tưởng không thể đạt tới, một thứ mà “tất cả chúng ta cùng hướng đến”, một chiến quả đáng ao ước nhưng vượt quá tầm tay. 
Thật không may, tất cả những mục đích về trỗi dậy, trưởng thành và phát triển đều đã được thỏa nguyện, giờ thì sao? Ở đỉnh cao, làm sao để tiến bước? Một câu trả lời, và có lẽ là câu trả lời hay hơn, trong lĩnh vực nghệ thuật hội họa lúc ấy, là phong cách Baroque. Nhưng với Michelangelo Buonarroti, một nghệ sĩ Ý trong thời đỉnh cao Phục Hưng, người sống lâu hơn đối thủ Raphael của mình những 44 năm, thì câu trả lời cho giai đoạn 1520 – 1580 lại là trường phái kiểu cách.
Ở góc nhìn nào đó, trường phái kiểu cách biểu thị một cuộc nổi loạn chống lại không khí cân bằng hài hòa bình dị của Phục Hưng. Hội họa Phục Hưng luôn coi trọng sự cân bằng, tỷ lệ, còn trường phái kiểu cách thì nhấn mạnh đến sự tao nhã trong trạng thái dị thường bất cân xứng. 
Trường phái kiểu cách “nhân tạo” hơn, nó ưa chuộng thứ áp lực ít tự nhiên, ít chân thực hơn so với Phục Hưng, và dùng chúng như biểu tượng hoặc vẻ đẹp phóng đại. Nhân vật trong bức vẽ thường có sự biến dạng và trừu tượng, nhưng những lựa chọn phong cách dị thường như vậy không nhất thiết phải phục vụ cho mục đích nào cả.
Để rõ hơn, hãy cùng xem xét bức “Chân dung tự họa qua gương lồi” (1524) của Parmigianino dưới đây.
Đầu tiên, phải nói rằng đây là bức tranh không thể có ở giai đoạn 30 năm trước đó. Nó vẽ lại chính xác hình ảnh phản chiếu trong một gương lồi. Cánh tay của chủ thể ở mặt trước cong vòng lên theo mặt cong của kính, và người xem tranh cũng thấy được sự biến dạng tương tự ở cái cửa sổ phía trên bên trái, góc mái nhà ở phía trên bên phải. Đó chính xác là những gì người ta nhìn thấy qua một gương lồi, và với những người thế kỷ 21 như chúng ta, nó có cùng ý tưởng với bức vẽ “Hand with Reflecting Sphere” của M. C. Escher.
Trong cả hai bức tranh, chúng ta đều cảm thấy sự méo mó được tạo ra bởi góc nhìn qua gương lồi phản xạ, vậy vấn đề ở đây là gì? Trong bức chân dung của Parmigianino, thực ra chỉ phần nhỏ bị bóp méo. Có một bức tường phẳng đằng sau khuôn mặt chủ thể, nhưng nó phẳng, nên không có sự biến dạng. 
Tác dụng bóp méo chỉ là cách sắp đặt thứ yếu, thậm chí dư thừa ở viền khung, còn ở trung tâm thì không có sự bóp méo nào cả bởi nó nằm trở chính giữa gương cầu, vậy nên bức chân dung thực ra không hơn gì một bức tranh thông thường, và nó không mang đến điều gì nổi bật hơn nữa. Nó khiến người xem phải tự hỏi: “Thế rốt cuộc thì ý ông là gì?”.
Ngược lại, bức chân dung của Escher đã hướng sự chú ý của chúng ta tập trung vào bàn tay người nghệ sĩ và ảnh phản chiếu của nó, chứ không phải khuôn mặt. Tuy khuôn mặt nằm ở trung tâm quả cầu, nhưng đó không phải là trung tâm trong tổng thể bức tranh. Bàn tay và hình phản chiếu của nó là trung tâm, được nhấn mạnh, trong khi khuôn mặt nghệ sĩ thì thật nhỏ bé, và sự biến dạng ấy đem đến cho bức tranh một vài điểm thú vị lôi cuốn người xem. 
Ngoài ra, ở chỗ mà Parmigianino đặt bức tường phẳng làm nền, Escher lại vẽ giá sách, đồ đạc, hai cửa sổ ở các góc khác nhau, và một trần nhà không phẳng lắm. Nói tóm lại, Escher bày biện nhiều chi tiết hơn trong bức vẽ của mình và mang đến cho người xem nhiều sự biến dạng hơn để tâm trí họ được chơi đùa thử thách.
“Madona of the Long Neck” của Parmigianino là bức tranh tinh túy của trào lưu kiểu cách. Bạn không thể nghiên cứu trường phái này nếu bỏ qua nó. 
Trong tranh, Madonna bị kéo dài tới điểm chụp, đứa trẻ trong lòng cô cũng vậy. Cổ của cô, may mắn thay, hài hòa tỉ lệ cùng cỡ đầu nhỏ bé, trong khi bờ vai xanh xao thì thật bất cân xứng. Có một người đàn ông, không biết vẽ vào để làm gì, ở phía dưới bên phải bức tranh, và người xem thì không có manh mối khả dĩ nhìn được để so sách kích cỡ thân thể anh với Madonna. 
Thông thường sẽ có vạch trên sàn nền, hoặc vài dấu hiệu biểu hiện không gian khác, nhưng ở đây thì không, và tác giả để người xem phải tự kết luận rằng anh ta chỉ là người đàn ông vô cùng nhỏ bé bên cạnh Madonna. Đằng sau anh ta là một hàng cột dài, nhưng không thấy nối với mái, và không phục vụ cho mục đích nào cả. Vị trí ánh sáng phản chiếu ra từ hàng cột ngay phía trước cho thấy rằng những cột trụ này thon thon hình búp măng, ta tạm đoán vậy. Tuy nhiên, gần gốc của hàng cột nói trên là bóng của chúng, vị trí bóng đổ xuống cho biết khoảng cách giữa các cột đúng bằng chiều rộng mỗi cột, nhưng với kích thước của chúng, độ sâu của mỗi cột có thể không nhiều hơn vài inch còn chiều rộng của chúng thì rõ ràng phải lên đến vài feet.
Với tất cả những điểm đó, bức tranh cũng có vài nét đẹp: cách sử dụng màu sắc tốt, những lớp quần áo được vẽ xuất sắc, biểu hiện trên khuôn mặt người ở tiền cảnh thật đẹp, nhưng dù vậy, sự kết hợp giữa chúng thì vụng về hết biết. Cứ như thể tác giả, vốn đã được coi là đại diện ưu tú của trường phái kiểu cách, tuy rất có hiểu biết về vài mặt hội họa, nhưng đã bỏ qua không biết những điểm cơ bản nhất vậy. Và kể từ khi bức “The Madonna of the Long Neck” mở đầu cho thời đại này, có thể dễ dàng kết luận từ nó rằng trào lưu kiểu cách này có lẽ không khác gì một thời đại của những tác phẩm nghệ thuật xấu xí.
Nhưng nếu điều đó là đúng, chúng ta phải nhìn vào người đã khởi sinh ra trào lưu này, để xem sai lạc bắt đầu từ đâu. Ai là bậc thầy nghệ thuật đã dẫn dắt những tâm trí trẻ trung đi lạc lối? Có nhiều người như vậy từ thời đỉnh cao Phục Hưng, nhưng cái tên nổi tiếng nhất là Michelangelo.
Giai đoạn 1508 – 1512 Michelangelo đang vẽ trần nhà nguyện Sistine ở thành phố Vatican, Rome. Với nghệ thuật hai chiều thời Phục Hưng, tranh trần nhà nguyện của Michelangelo là kiệt tác và là nền tảng của giai đoạn đỉnh cao. Nó dài 131 feet, rộng 43 feet, diện tích là 5633 feet vuông, chứa 47 bức bích họa tuyệt đẹp kể câu chuyện về sự sa ngã của con người từ cuốn sách Genesis.
Hai mươi ba năm sau, tức là mười lăm năn sau cái chết của Raphael, cũng là lúc đánh dấu sự kết thúc của giai đoạn đỉnh cao Phụ Hưng ở nam châu Âu (Ở bắc Âu, thời điểm 1528 được sử dụng vì nó trùng với cái chết của Albrecht Durer, nghệ sĩ Phục Hưng đỉnh cao của Đức), Michelangelo quay trở lại nhà nguyện Sistine trong một môi trường kinh tế xã hội thật khác, để vẽ bức tường phía sau, mô tả cảnh cuộc phán xét cuối cùng trong sách Khải huyền. 
Bức tường phía sau có diện tích không bằng một phần ba cái trần nhà, chỉ 45 x 40 ft (1800 ft vuông), nhưng Michelangelo đã mất bảy năm để hoàn thành nó (trong khi ông vẽ trần nhà chỉ mất bốn năm).
Nhìn chung, trừ với một số người không hứng thú với chủ đề của nó, còn lại có thể kết luận bức tường phía sau vẫn là tác phẩm tuyệt đẹp. 
Tuy nhiên nếu nhìn kỹ hơn, so sánh nó với bức họa vẽ trần mà Michelangelo hoàn thành trước đó, bạn sẽ nhận ra một số khác biệt đáng ngại.
Trong cả hai bức tranh từ trần nhà nguyện Sistine, ta đều thấy có nhiều chất tự nhiên và hiện thực hơn. Những thân thể người được vẽ rất đúng tỉ lệ, tỉ lệ riêng của nó và với tương quan các bộ phận khác. 
Đặt sang một bên chuyện Michelangelo có phong cách miêu tả thân thể con người không thể bắt chước nổi, thì bức tranh vẫn hoàn toàn chân thực. Nhưng giờ hãy nhìn vào thân thể của Chúa trong bức “The Last Judgement”, bạn sẽ thấy một cơ thể toàn cơ bắp là cơ bắp, không có hông hay thắt lung. Thân mình, từ vai xuống đến chân gần như là một khối vuông. 
Đức Mẹ đồng trinh, người ngồi sau Chúa, đang ở một tư thế chẳng ai có thể giữ lâu, và được mô tả theo cách gợi ý rằng cô ấy đang giữ cố giữ tư thế ấy.
Đúng vậy, người ta phải nhìn vào những bức tranh này với ý tưởng về biểu tượng và “một thế giới khác” ở trong đầu. 
Chúa được coi như một đấng quyền năng dồi dào, oai nghiêm hùng mạnh, trong khi Mary thì đoan trang nghiêm cẩn nhưng không thuộc về thế giới này. Nhưng biểu tượng dường như thu hút quá nhiều sự chú ý và làm mất đi ý nghĩa hàm ẩn của nó, đến mức người xem đều chỉ chú tâm vào sự biến dạng méo mó. 
Tuy vậy, hãy hiểu rằng, tôi không chỉ trích phê bình nghệ sĩ hay kỹ thuật của ông, mà tôi phê bình triết lý và ý thức hệ đằng sau phong cách kiểu cách này.
Thành thật mà nói, có một số bức vẽ theo trường phái kiểu cách, tranh chân dung hay tranh kể chuyện gì đó, trông có vẻ kiểu cách chỉ bởi vì thời đại và vị trí của người nghệ sĩ. Nhưng có nhiều điều hơn có thể dẫn người ta đến kết luận rằng, nếu trường phái kiểu cách là câu trả lời cho câu hỏi: chúng ta sẽ đến đâu sau khi đã ở đỉnh cao Phục Hưng, nó hẳn phải là một câu trả lời lầm lạc.
Trào lưu kiểu cách từ gốc đến ngọn hầu như gói gọn trong phạm vi nước Ý. Nó không chuyển di theo bất kỳ cách nào qua dãy Alps. Phong cách và thời kỳ này cũng đứng trọn trong thế kỷ 16, bắt đầu từ năm 1520 và kết thúc gọn gang vào năm 1580. Hơn nữa, từ giai đoạn kiểu cách này, nước Ý không còn kiếm thêm được những nghệ sĩ bậc thầy mẫu mực, không còn dẫn đầu nghệ thuật châu Âu nữa, và thay vào đó là Pháp. Và khi giai đoạn Baroque bắt đầu vào năm 1590 cho đến giữa thế kỷ 20, Pháp dẫn dắt hầu hết các mặt nghệ thuật và nước Ý hạ xuống thành một bảo tàng cổ điển.
Vài người coi trường phái kiểu cách là cây cầu nối giữa Phục Hưng và Baroque bởi trong suốt thời đó, các góc độ và kỹ thuật khác được sử dụng tốt trong phong cách Baroque thì đến từ trào lưu kiểu cách. Thế nên người ta coi trào lưu này không hẳn là một phong cách, mà giống một trạng thái chuyển giao, một khoảng sáu mươi năm đầy màu sắc, và không tuyệt vời được như giai đoạn trước hoặc sau đó.
Để kết lại bài viết này, tôi sẽ trình bày cho bạn vài ví dụ tiêu biểu của trào lưu kiểu cách, và nhấn mạnh những biến dạng của nó, từ đó bạn có thể tự thấy những kỳ quặc của thời đại.
Venus và Cupid chiếm lấy tiền cảnh bức tranh. Cupid nấp sau mẹ mình. Hãy nhìn kỹ để thấy lưng và mặt sau của cậu bị uốn cong – không hề thực tế – để đáp lại nụ hôn của mẹ cậu, một nụ hôn bất khả thi từ góc độ này. Ngoài sự biến dạng có thể nhìn thấy, không có cách giải thích dứt khoát nào cho câu chuyện tượng trưng này. Thông điệp đã mất đi theo thời gian, hoặc lẩn khuất trong cách dựng hình riêng biệt của Bronzino.
  Một lần nữa, phải khẳng định tôi sẽ chẳng nhanh tay treo bức tranh này ở phòng khách nếu nó mô tả ai đó trong gia đình mình. Dù chủ thể có đẹp đẽ tao nhã đến đâu thì vẻ đẹp ấy cũng bị bóp méo với đôi vai khổng lồ và chiếc cổ dài ngoẵng.
Theo nhiều cách khác nhau, bức tranh này mô tả đẹp và giàu cảm xúc trong cách sử dụng màu sắc, nhưng hãy nhìn con người lao động nghèo khổ dưới sức nặng của chân Chúa. Thân mình và đôi chân của anh ta được kéo dài đến mức chúng ta không biết biểu hiện của anh ta là đang than khóc cho cái chết của Chúa hay là bởi sức nặng quá mức khiến anh ta phải kéo dài thân mình ra để chịu đựng. Thậm chí màu trên thân mình và cánh tay trên dường như ốm yếu xanh xao đến mức ta không chắc anh ta ở trần hay mặc một chiếc áo chẽn bó chặt.
Đó là những biến dạng méo mó mà nghệ sĩ theo trường phái kiểu cách giới thiệu như là biểu tượng, hoặc theo một cách nào đó, như một lời tuyên bố. Nếu coi đó như một phong cách, một thời đại đúng nghĩa, ngang hàng với Baroque và Phục Hưng, thì ta phải thừa nhận rằng nó chẳng phải một thời đại thành công. Nếu ta coi nó như một sự chuyển giao, ta sẽ dễ dàng thông cảm hơn, đó là một giai đoạn 40 đến 50 năm mà người nghệ sĩ mất phương hướng. Thật may mắn làm sao, sau đó cuối cùng họ cũng đã tìm được hướng đi đúng.
Bài gốc: https://artsartistsartwork.com/mannerism-understanding-this-enigmatic-era-of-italian-art/
Tác giả Apple Juice từ Artartistartwork.com
Minh Hùng dịch
Bài đã đăng trên Ipick.vn
#Trường phái Kiểu Cách
NHỮNG BÀI NỔI BẬT
Kéo hàn lâm gần văn hóa đại chúng hay nâng đại chúng gần tri thức hàn lâm?
Hà Thủy Nguyên
20/06/2021
Fake Famous: Sự nhạt nhẽo của thế giới KOL – người nổi tiếng trên Internet
Lê Ái
25/05/2021
“Vệ thần của tuổi thơ” của William Joyce: Bộ truyện thiếu nhi dẫn đường tìm đứa trẻ bên trong mỗi chúng ta
Hà Thủy Nguyên
23/12/2020

================================================================================

